15th—We went to the famous Brooklyn Bridge.

Verily, New York gentlemen are interested with their papers in the car.
Newspapers, O newspapers! There’s no slip of a doubt that they would die
without the sight of their newspapers. The unheroic part about them is
that they forget neatly to offer their seats to a lady. Woman loves an
absent-minded man once in a while, but never on the car, I do say.

I suppose every woman of this city has to be rich.

Must I equip a carriage?

I do not see why I could not win the first prize with my Louisiana
ticket.

How I wish to fabric an every-inch-a-Japanese mansion on Fifth Avenue,
and welcome a thousand tojins to hear my Jap song on Sunday!

“Is this bridge built for Americans or Europeans, Uncle? People crossing
here use no English,” I said.

“Liberty Statue!”

I will let the Beauty statue hail from the Bay of Yedo, when I am
wealthy enough to afford it.

Doesn’t Nippon signify beauty?

“How dear is that sign, ‘Beware of Pick-pockets!’ It makes me just feel
as if I were at Shinbashi station in Tokio, doesn’t it you, Uncle?”

Humbly humble ’rikisha men!

If I were besieged by them imploring me to take a little honourable
ride, the scene would be complete.

I miss such a merry car in Amerikey.

We walked down Broadway. We came to a graveyard.

Tombstones in the midst of commerce!

O romantic New York!

I wondered how Wall Street gentlemen would be struck glancing at them.

What a soft silence hovered!

The old Gothic Church was my own ideal.

“Uncle, let us fall in and rest!” I cried.

The morning service was proceeding.

Alas and alas!

Not one soul was there.

Is this a religious city?

The inside was compact of heavenly purple air. Mr. Bishop—whatever he
may be—gestured like another being from a loftier realm. A beautiful boy
(there’s no greater fascination than a boy with a prayer-book) supported
the service. Intangibleness of speech is itself a divine charm.

“Will you mind asking Mr. Bishop whether he wants a sweeping girl? I
wish I were given just a chance to clean such a holy church, uncle.”

Then I looked up to Mr. Secretary.