14th—I elaborated a nosegay.

The poet and uncle dignified themselves in frock-coats.

The coming of the coffin was slow.

Mr. Poet had proffered his own graveyard to let an unknown poet lodge
there. “Is it because you want some one to greet you when you die?” I
said in laughter.

I seated myself by a creek.

I entered involuntarily into the riddle of Life and Death.

The water under my feet rolled down, positively not knowing why nor
whence. The wind passed, “willy-nilly blowing.” I wondered whither it
went. Mr. Omar is unquestionably a true poet. The petals of a rose
before me fell.

I murmured:


             “Each Morn a thousand Roses brings, you say;
              Yes, but where leaves the Rose of Yesterday?”


I was crying in sadness when the coffin arrived.

Mr. Heine and my uncle lifted it by either edge. The neighbouring
farmers and two sardonically cool gentlemen from the undertaker’s aided
them. The jaw-fallen papa of the dead carried all the posies.

And Miss Morning Glory (who is the belle of Tokio) shouldered a bench
for the purpose of sustaining the coffin when they were tired.

The hill is precipitous.

The gentlemen stopped numberless times, before they stationed themselves
on the top.

The grave was hollowed behind Mr. Poet’s monument. They sank the coffin.

What a tremor of silence sharpened the air! I was shaking.

The poor papa read a chapter from the Bible. He described his loving
son’s life, in doleful honourableness.

“There are a thousand flowers in Spring,”—the poet spoke—“whose repute
is not extensively spoken, like that of the rose or violet. Some of them
are not given even a name. They spend their smile and odour into the
breeze, and die without any repining. They are content, because they are
true to God. So a poet’s life should be. What is celebrity? Keats was
told of his beautiful graveyard, and he said: ‘I have already seemed to
feel the flowers growing over me.’ If this poet, whom we now bury, had
been told of this hill, he might have said: ‘I see already the
butterflies beaming over my head.’ Spring is coming. The poppies and
buttercups shall dress the hill.”

A church-bell chimed from the valley.

We left the buried to his solitude.

                  *       *       *       *       *

My uncle and I sat under an acacia tree, silent for some time.

“Look, Morning Glory!” he said, exhibiting a silver piece.

“Is there any story about that dollar?”

“The father of the dead paid me for carrying the coffin.”

“Uncle, did you accept it?”

“Yes.”

“Such a funny uncle!”

“Why not?”

“You have spoiled all your nobility for only one dollar.”

I upturned my face, afterward, appealing in gleeful tone:

“O Uncle, you ought to give me half of it. Fifty cents! I carried the
bench, you know.”