8th—The poet was hoeing in his vegetable garden.

His attire was theatrical.

His red crape sash laxly surrounding his trousers lacked, I am sorry to
say, a large Japanese tobacco bag. The cap with gay ribbons was like one
of Li Hung Chang’s. His back carried a bearskin, inside of which some
slovenly yellow silk flapped down.

How tall he was!

“Please, don’t dig over there, Mr. Heine, because I buried my poem
there,” I said.

“What poem, my lady?” he asked.

“The poem to be read at the unveiling of my statue of the Muse on your
mountain top, which may occur possibly within five years. The opening
lines sound thus:


                       ‘Victor of Life and Song,
                        O Muse of golden grace!’”


“That’s great! Why did you bury it?”

“Don’t you bury your poems? The best poems are those not published. The
very best are those not written. Dante Gabriel Rosetti buried his ‘House
of Life,’ because they were not for a gaping millionaire’s wife, but
only for his own little wife. But his greatness was ruined when he dug
them up and sold them. Poor poet! What all the poets ought to do, I
think, is to bury their poems in a potato garden. What a shame even the
poets have to eat once in a while! They should wait till the potatoes
grow, and then sell them in a vegetable stand, calling ‘Poetical
Potatoes!’ Do you sell your poems, Mr. Heine?”

“Yes.”

“Aren’t you making your living with your fruits?”

“I never sell them, my dear.”

“What do you do?”

“I give them to needy persons. But I was obliged, last year, to hang up
a sign, ‘No Fruit Lover is Wanted.’ I told an Oakland minister to come
up and eat _some_ plums. He brought his wife and children, even his
grand-mother. They shouldered away every bit of fruit from half a dozen
trees. Next day so many people trampled in with an introduction from the
minister.”

“Such a minister! I see no use to have the sign, ‘Fruit Grower,’ if you
don’t sell.”

“Well, my dear lady, God will be merciful to let me use it in place of
‘Poem Manufacturer!’”

My uncle announced that tea was boiled.

We left the garden.