THE HEIGHTS, Feb. 1st

Let me recline heart-to-heart on the breast of Mother Nature! Let me
retreat to a hillside not far from the city, yet verily near to God! Let
me go to my poet abode!

We abandoned the Fruitvale car at the hill-foot.

My uncle picked out our destination from the speckles in the distance.

The breeze (how heavenly is a country breeze!) enticed my soul—a Jap
girl also is provided with some soul—into “Far-Beyond.”

“I feel myself another girl, Uncle.”

“How?”

“I’m a poet already. The poet without poem is greater, don’t you know?”

We climbed the hill slowly. Every step enlarged the spectacle.

When we attained to one wildly well-kept garden, the whole bay of the
Golden Gate stretched before us. A thousand villages knelt humbly like
vassals.

I saw a tiny gate with the sign:

                            “Fruit Grower.”

An old gentleman appeared from a cottage, singing.


               “Ah, take the Cash, and let the Credit go,
                Nor heed the rumble of a distant Drum!”


“Poet!” Uncle whispered.

Let me now examine him!

What lengthy hair he wore!

It didn’t annoy me, however, because he stamped himself on my mind as if
he were an ancient statue. I imagined him a type of mediæval squire. I
thought of him truly as one metamorphosed from the frontispiece of a
wholly forgotten volume in a cobwebbed recess of a library.

His courteous voice was simply dignified.

“Nature never hurries. God commands you every happiness and all repose.
Here’s your little home, my gentle lady! I am at your service any time.
I hope you will find it comfortable.”

He set me at the “Willow Cottage.”

He slipped gracefully away.

There was some time before I heard his “kotsu kotsu” on my door.

I opened it.

“Greeting from the host!” Mr. Heine offered me a tuft of brisk roses.

Heine was the poet’s name.

How loving!

I buried myself in the thought of straying to a fairy isle, and being
accepted romantically by the dwellers.

I suspected that I was dreaming.

“Arcadia!” I exclaimed, when the poet announced that supper would be
prepared within half an hour.

I spied him through the window, gathering the loppings of trees and
leaves. He made a camp-fire. Its soft smoke surged into the sky. Oh,
smell it!

How fascinating is the Poet’s life!

I ran out, crying:

“Pray, make me useful!”