20th—The squirrel by my window shows a great fancy for me. He honoured
me three times already this morning. He bore a somewhat scholarly air. A
retired professor, I reckon.

Is he regular with his diary?

Possibly he is idle with a pen, like any other professor.

Let me scribble for him to-day!

My one bottle of ink has some time to dry up yet.

I will name it “The Cave Journal.” I will leave it to the Professor for
a souvenir upon my sayonara to this hill.


                                   A

Where are my spectacles?


                                   B

Upon my soul, I believe that some mischief is raging. I can never trust
even the poet abode. Who stole my two-cent stamp?

God bless you, my precious daughter at Sierra Nevada!

By and by I will erect my private telegraph between us.


                                   C

The idea of an idiotic spider tying his net across my front gate!

How ever could he be so ambitious as even to incline to arrest me!

He may very likely be a detective. A railroad brigand is hiding in these
Heights, I suppose.

The world is running worse every day.

How shocking!

It was a fundamental error of God, to create that adventuress Eve. The
offspring of a crow can’t be other than a crow.

Our squirrel history is not blotted by any criminal. I feel a bit
conceited in speaking about it. How can I help it?

The trouble with God is that he was awfully vain to express his own
ability by so many useless things.

Rifle, for instance.

My poor wife!


                                   D

To-day is the anniversary of my beloved. She was shot by one two-legged
barbarian.

I appealed to the police. American police are rotten, through and
through. The murderer bribed them, I fancy.

I found my wife, but she was only a skin.

How often did I tell her that she was risking too much in sporting
around! But she didn’t mind me, insisting that sight-seeing was a better
education.

I carried her skin into my home.

I cleansed it, and altered its form a trifle, because it was a lady’s. I
am still keeping it for church-wear.

I feel dreadful, thinking of her.


                                   E

A butterfly passed by my cavern, a hundred times.

Each time she threw me a vulgar laugh.

Her face was thickly powdered in yellow. Does she think herself
charming? I should say that I would prefer a girl in tights from a
saloon-stage to her indecency.

Such a flirt!

I suppose that she wanted me to marry her.

No!

Am I not old enough to avoid running into such foolishness?


                                   F

Rainy day!

I sat in a memorial corner of my cave, with an unfinished novel of my
wife’s.

I do judge she had flashes of genius. She was so deep, like the sky. I
never suspected that she could gracefully have beaten George Eliot, if
she had only survived.

Poor girl!

One tenderly loved by God passes away young.

I have fallen into the habit of crying unmanfully nowadays.

I cannot help it, can I?


                                   G

One thing I must furnish is a bathroom.

Cleanliness is the first rule of heaven, I am told.

I went to the lily pond to take a gracious bath.

O such water gamins! Dirty-handed frogs!

How could I dip me in the turbid water?

The frogs ought to go to a reformatory school. They have no culture,
whatever.


                                   H

Camera hunters are thick as fogs.

To-day I came near being a victim.

No, sir!

I can’t permit my picture to be seen with those of cheap matinee idols.
I must keep some dignity.

Americans are too commercial altogether. The pictures of our race are in
demand, I imagine.


                                   I

Beautiful moon, last night!

I filled my stomach with the divine water from a creek.

My face waved in the water. I flattered myself that I was a pretty
handsome gentleman.

I sang an ancient Chinese song:


                      “Come ’long, to-morrow moon,
                       Carrying a harp!”


                                   J

Stop your empty noise, meadow-larks!

Silence is the first study of this hill and the last, don’t you know?

I am absorbed in my grave work, “The Secret of the World.”


                                   K

My neighbouring Jap girl is rather attractive, isn’t she?

I heard a few scratches of her native bubbling.

The pagan speech is not so bad as I thought.


                                   L

If there is one thing I cannot endure, it is ignorance.

What is the state of your roses, old boy?

The poet Heine is utterly alien to rose culture. Shall I order “How to
Raise Roses” from a London publisher?


                                   M

I went up the hill to pray to God. The higher the nearer.

When I came back, my honourable vestibule was blocked, I found, by the
dirt. The poet was ditching close by my residence.

I couldn’t blame his conduct, however, because no one could see my home.
I don’t hang out a sign like a quack doctor.

It occurred to me that I would strike into his cottage, and snatch the
best poems from his drawer, and sell them with my name.

“I must secure the international copyright,” I said.

But I couldn’t dare it, my impulse being thwarted.

I am no wicked reporter, don’t you see?

I hid me in his historical iron pot all day.


                                   N

Heine was posting around the following card:

                             _No Shooting._

I venture to say that he is the only one civilised Two-Legged in the
whole world.


                                   O

Where is my napkin?

Chinese laundry isn’t punctual in delivery.


                                   P

I think I must learn how to swear for a pastime.


                                   Q

My fellow brother Mr. —— was shot this morning.

The paper says that there is a possibility of war between Russia and
Japan. A preacher prophesies the disappearance of the universe.

Everything is precarious in the extreme.

I will not poke around outside during the day. I will loaf in the poet’s
orchard under the breezy moonlight.

Poetical existence is just enough. I will withdraw me to the sanctuary
of the Muses.


                                   R

Heaven be with my soul! Amen!


                                   S

Good-bye, my dear old world!