5th—I wrote a letter to the artist:

    “MY SWEET OSCAR:

            “You will love no more your Morning Glory, I am certain,
    when you are informed how she looks nowadays.

    “She inclines against a willow trunk by her cottage. Were you
    ever acquainted with the great repose of a poetess? Her eyes
    flash in divine sarcasm. She will shoot them down to the mortal
    domain (she lives on the mountain), while she murmurs in
    tragical accents: ‘I pity you, ant-mortals!’

    “Isn’t she shocking?

    “Oscar, I have withdrawn to the Heights, and am prying into the
    Incomprehensible of Nature with Mr. Heine.

    “He is unique.

    “I take it upon me to say that he is a great poet. Because, in
    the first place, he never asked me yet, ‘Do poems pay in Japan?’

    “It’s such a trying work for an old man like him to pose as a
    poet all the time.

    “Poet is a sensitive creation. He fancies, I think, the whole
    world is staring at him. Poor Poet! He keeps up, and tries to be
    picturesque as he can.

    “I am grieved to state, however, that his picturesqueness
    frequently drops into silliness.

    “The absurd thing is that even my uncle takes a part in his
    farce.

    “We had no meat to bite yesterday.

    “The poet had no shot left for his gun.

    “What did he plan, do you imagine?

    “He went up the hill, shouldering his pick. My uncle retainered
    him with a spade.

    “‘We will soon bring back a squirrel which we will dig out, Miss
    Morning Glory,’ the poet said.

    “Could you ever suppose, Oscar, that any animal except an
    invalid (an animal who has four feet at that, instead of two
    like my venerable gentlemen) could permit itself to be so slow
    like them?

    “I laughed till my side ached.

    “Funny old men!

    “Every sort of sweat fell from their brows when they dragged
    their fatigued feet home not accompanied by even one inch of any
    animal tail.

    “‘I have never heard yet, Mr. Poet, of a squirrel turned to
    turnip,’ I gibed.

    “I dread old age, because it makes woman inquisitive, and man
    silly. Inquisitiveness is tasteless like wax, while silliness is
    helpless, like a fish on the sand.

    “I fear you are silly already, when you say that you sat up late
    looking at my picture.

    “Sat up late?

    “What will you do if your mamma thinks you can’t sleep from hard
    drink when you yawn continually at the table?

    “Please, don’t do it again!

    “Step to your bed at half-past six as I do!

    “Are you sure that my picture approved your act?

    “I guess it shrugged its shoulders from contempt, the delicious
    moment of blushing being passed.

    “If my picture is so precious, I advise you to alter it to
    ashes. You will take two spoonfuls of the ashes every morning. I
    am sure, then, your soul will be saved.

    “O my darling, I love you!

                   “I am your

                      “LITTLE JAP GIRL

    “P.S.—This letter was written by my duck-quill. My new
    invention, you know.

    “My handwriting is clumsy enough, I suppose, to sell as high as
    any ancient author’s autograph.

    “Sayonara!”