7th—To-day I was the _chef_, while my uncle was second cook.

I placed a heroic iron pot over the camp-fire I dropped a lump of beef
in, and afterward the mass of potatoes, carrots, and onions. Mr. Poet’s
directions were that they should boil for two hours.

Mr. Heine intruded, saying that he would like to season them himself.

“Longfellow, Lowell—they all loved high seasoning as I,” he said,
snatching a pepper-box from my hand.

He kept tapping the bottom of the box, when the cover fell into the pot.

Oya!

The red pepper garmented the whole thing.

“Go, Mr. Poet! Why don’t you mind your own business? You are butler
to-day.” I spoke in rough sweetness, and drove him away.

He began to place a linen cloth on the table, while I dipped up all the
pepper. He picked up one dozen pebbles to weight the tablecloth. The
first thing he put on the table was his claret bottle. How could he lose
it from sight! When he said that everything was in place, he had
forgotten the knives and forks. Dear old poet!

We sat at the table under the wild rose bushes.

Mr. Heine read aloud the following menu:

                        “PERFUME OF OMAR’S ROSE
                         WATER OF JORDAN RIVER
                         MOTHER LOVE BROTH
                         MEAT OF WISDOM
                         POTATOES OF SIMPLICITY
                         PASSION CARROT
                         ONION OF WIT
                         DREAM COFFEE.

                              DESSERT

              TYPICAL TOKIO SMILE OF MISS MORNING GLORY.”

My grandmamma was our guest.

“Mother, you talk too much always. Remember, this is a sacred service.
Silence helps your digestion. Eat slowly, think something higher, and be
content!” Poet said.

We smelled the “Perfume of Omar’s Rose,” and wet our lips with the
“Water of Jordan River.”

The broth was served.

Everybody choked with its pungent fire.

Poor Mrs. Heine!

She was showering her tear-beans.

“This is perfectly seasoned. Send up your bowl again, ladies and
gentlemen!”

Mr. Poet’s performance was beautifully buffoonish.

We finished our meat and vegetables.

I smiled lightly, and said: “Are you ready for the Tokio smile?”

“Just ten minutes yet, my dear!” The poet smoothed such a lengthy gray
beard.

I winked to Grandma. We looked upon him slyly.