21st—My answer to Oscar is as follows:

    “DEAR HONOURABLE MR. ELLIS:

            “Let me begin in respectable fashion!

    “A Jap girl is awfully formal.

    “Do you know, Mr. Ellis, whom you are addressing?

    “I am an Oriental.

    “Nippon daughters believe ‘ev’rithin’ a gentleman mentions.

    “They have been fooled enough, I should declare, in American
    fiction. Oscar—no, Mr. Ellis—don’t let me earn the anecdote that
    I drifted to Ameriky to be toyed with! My ancestor did a
    harakiri. I am pretty sure I have, then, to kill myself.

    “Don’t recite again your honourable confession of love!

    “It made me cry.

    “My dark face with drenched eyes will degrade me to a hired
    Chinese ‘crying woman.’

    “Your narration was dramatic.

    “Your cleverness is the most lamentable thing about you. Woman
    used to love a bright fellow many years ago. Do you know that
    the modern girl woos a stupid man?

    “Please, don’t repeat again such an adjective as ‘heavenly’ for
    my face! No one utters the word ‘heaven’ except in swearing.
    Even ministers juggle with it for a jest in church, I suppose.
    My face isn’t heavenly at all. You know it, don’t you?

    “You amused me, however, when you told how you had pillaged my
    picture from Mother Schuyler’s room to put in your own, feigning
    that it needed to be retouched.

    “Poor Mother Schuyler!

    “If she knew your secret!

    “Frankly, I fear that such a gentleman as you does commit
    forgery always. Have you no consanguinity with a convict?

    “O such a wretched boy!

    “The saddest thing about a woman is that she is glad to fall in
    love with the worthless.

    “Do I love you?

    “Give me time to reply to the question!

    “Everything is tardy with a Japanese. I was educated by
    slowness; I bow one dozen times before I speak.

    “O Oscar, you got to think of my side a little bit!

    “Every girl claims that she has half a population as adorers in
    her pocket handkerchief.

    “You are the only one young American I ever met.

    “If I accept your love, I am afraid one may satirise my
    destitution.

    “You’ll write me soon, won’t you?

                   “Yours, M. G.

    “P.S.—I wish I could show you how charmingly I smoke. I learned
    the art recently. I tap the cigarette with my middle finger to
    knock the ashes off. It is delightful to heap a hill of ashes on
    the table edge. When I puff, finding no word after ‘And—’ the
    smoke seems to be speaking for me.

    “But I assure you that I smoked only before my uncle.

    “I was a pretty naughty girl at home, but I flatter myself that
    I can easily be classed among the best in this country.

    “White women behave terribly, you know.”