23rd—It is delightful to sit opposite the whitest of linen and—to
portray on it the face of an imaginary Mr. Sweetheart while eating.

Whiteness is appetising.

And the boldly-marked creases of the linen are so dear. Without them the
linen is not half so inviting.

I was taught the beauty of single line in drawing class some years ago.

But now for the first time I fully comprehended it from the Meriken
tablecloth.

I wished I could ever stay gazing at it.

If I start my housekeeping in this country—do I ever dream of it?—I
shall not hesitate to invest all my money in linen.

I laughed when I fancied that I sat with my husband—where’s he in the
world?—spreading a skilfully ironed linen cloth on the Spring grasses
(what a gratifying white and green!), and I upset a teapot over the
linen, while he ran after water;—then I picked all the buttercups and
covered the dark red stain.

The minister makes a ridiculous show of himself in the dining-room.

His laughter draws the attention of every lady.

This morning he exclaimed: “Americans have no courtesy for strangers,
except meaning money.”

And he finished his speech with his boisterous “Ha, ha, ha!”

A pale impatient lady, like a trembling winter leaf, sitting at the
table next to us, shrugged her shoulders and muttered, “Oh, my!”

I hoped I could invent any scheme to make him hasten to his post—Kara or
Tenjiku, whatever place it be.

He is good-natured like a rubber stamp.

But I am sorry to say that he does not fit Amerikey.

I was relieved when he announced that his departure would occur
to-morrow.

My dignity was saved.

I cut a square piece of paper. I pencilled on it as follows:



                       To the Japanese Legation.
                          The City of Mexico.
                    Handle Carefully, Easily Broken.


I put it on the large palm of the minister. I warned him that he should
never forget to pin it on his breast.

“Mean little thing you are!” he said.

And his great happy “Ha, ha, ha!” followed as usual.

Bye-bye!

                  *       *       *       *       *

The negroes are horrid. I scanned them on the first chance of my life.

What is the standard of beauty of their tribe, I am eager to be
informed!

I searched for “coon” in my dictionary. The explanation was
unsatisfactory.

The ever-so-kind Americans don’t consider them, I am certain, as
“animals allied to the bear.”

Tell me what it means.