23rd—Uncle left the Heights for Frisco.

I have encountered somewhere one picture, “Stolen Kiss,” symbolising
sweetness.

I dare say the sweetest thing in the world is to steal into a
gentleman’s room and over-turn his things.

The gentleman smell is provocative.

My uncle?

I can only say that he is more desirable than an old woman. Old woman is
sad as a dry persimmon.

I stole into his room.

God will overlook my petty crime—how lovely to be scratched by guilt!—in
consideration of the fact that a Jap girl never profanes.

I turned his pillow. Pillow is a fascination for me ever since I have
read of a poet who hid his diary under it.

Look at the book, “A Random Note!”

He was working to beat me with his journal, I derided.

I sat on his bed, opening it.

“How original!” I exclaimed.

Uncle, you are a cynic, aren’t you?

Let me pick a few pieces from his pen!

                  *       *       *       *       *

“Unfortunately! Japanese are accustomed from babyhood to depend on
another’s back. The hereditary fashion of nursing the baby on the back
has thoroughly taught them dependence. Independence is only a coat of
arms to distinguish man from the beasts—that is all. I urge that
Emerson’s essays be adopted in the Nippon schools. His ‘Self-reliance’
should be the first of all.

“Most unhappily! I have observed the Japanese fad in America for years,
and it has not yet reached its culmination. Each month the books on
Japan are placed before the public. It is verily sad even to cut their
edges. (The practical Americans prove themselves unpractical in leaving
the leaves of books uncut.) I say that our Japan is entitled to regard
for worthier things than geisha girls or a fashion in bowing. We should
decline your love, Americans, if it is rooted merely in your fancy for
our paper lanterns. I have frequently come to conclude that Americans
are eminently the freakish nation. I feel not only occasionally that
they lack the reasoning power. I do not assume the phenomena of the
yellow journals as my proof.

“A year or two ago, one Japanese theatrical troup roamed. They are not
catalogued at home as actors. They chose to skip on the stage, simply
because a bit more money is in it than in the calling of
‘lantern-carrying for politicians.’ Any wild animal can skip. I am now
confronted with the question whether American generosity is not without
sense. They piled up their money for them. Even the first-class critics
struggled to find out something from such poor art. I am bound to be
thankful, however, for the Americans saved these poor players from
bankruptcy in Japan. It reminds me of a story. Our Nippon government
many years ago appointed a certain loafing sailor as an English
instructor, giving him a monthly pay of three hundred dollars. Sailor
with an anchor-tatoo on his hand! Three hundred dollars are no small
coin in Japan. Our sailor professor said, I am told, that he had not
heard of any Milton. Ignorance can easily be a philanthropist, if it can
be anything.

“Japanese love Nature? They do. But how sad to glance at Japanese
garden! It is painful to notice the dwarf trees. Japs never permit one
thing to grow naturally. Country of deformity! America, most natural,
most manly nation!”