28th—The following is my letter to Mr. Oscar:

    “OSCAR SAN! ELLIS SAN!

    “I never liked your profession, simply because it is too
    beautiful.

    “I don’t see why you cannot transfer to some other business.

    “I have been ever so much fascinated with odd sorts of manual
    work. If I were a gentleman, I would very likely pursue the
    calling of grave-digger or sea-diver.

    “Yesterday I passed by some labourers breaking massive stones.
    They lifted their hammers (O Oscar, look at their muscles!) and
    knocked them down to the sound of ‘Sara bagun!’ They jerked the
    ‘sara bagun,’ Oscar. Does it mean ‘ready?’ Mrs. Willis’ Century
    dictionary must be imperfect, since it does not contain such a
    word. Am I mis-spelling?

    “Suppose I marry one of those!

    “He will return home awfully tired. He will naturally doze after
    dinner. When his smoking pipe has slipped from his lips and
    burned my best tablecloth, isn’t it possible that I will be
    mad?... I startled him, pulling his hair ever so hard. Now you
    must think that he grew mad also. He seized my arm, and beat me.
    O Oscar, he beat me surely!... Then he will repent his conduct,
    and kneel by my side, begging my forgiveness. He will say, ‘My
    dear sweet wife—’

    “Do you know how interesting it is to be beaten by a husband?

    “I well-nigh fixed my mind never to affiance with a man too
    genteel to hit me.

    “Woman is a revolting little bit of thing.

    “If you say ‘Yes,’ I am quite ready to slam my ‘No!’

    “Oscar San!

    “I am afraid that you are too amiable.

    “What you have to do for your next missive is to collect every
    kind of dreadful adjectives from your dictionary, and throw them
    in.

    “You know what to do when I get angry, don’t you?

    “Ellis San!

    “You are too handsome.

    “I am fond of a comely face as anybody else.

    “But I fancy often how it would be if I fell in love with a
    deformity.

    “People would laugh at me doubtless. But how dramatic it would
    be when I proclaimed, ‘Because I love him!’

    “What a romantic phrase that is!

    “Can’t you deform yourself?

    “Sayonara,

                   “With a thousand bows,

                      “M. G.

    “P.S.—My letter never finishes without a P.S.

    “Isn’t that awful?

“My uncle asked me whom I was corresponding with. I mentioned ‘Olive.’

“Old man is jealous always.

“So you got to counterfeit your sister’s penmanship for your envelope.”