2nd—Dream and reality are not marked here by different badges. They
waltz round. Dear poet home!

Was it in my dream that I heard the tinkle of bells?

I thought something was going on.

I parted from the bed. I pushed out my face from the window.

Look at the procession of cows!

I have read much of them, but I admit that it was my first occasion to
admire them. I am a trivial Jap, only acquainted with cherry blossoms
and lanterns. How I wished to knot the bells round my waist, and whisk
down the path by the violets!

“Lover’s lane!”

It should be the title for that path, I thought, if I were Mr. Poet.

I finished my toilet. I leaped out upon the grasses smiling up to the
sunlight.

I congratulated myself on my new life.

Then I found my uncle sitting by the camp-fire.

“Ohayo!” I said, filling the seat on another side.

I remember one Japanese essay, “The Poetry of a Tea Kettle.” Indeed! The
kettle was a singer. Its melody was far-reaching. It was like a harp of
pine leaves fingered by the zephyr.

I faced up, and saw my poet moving down from the lily pond. Two frogs in
his hand.

“Frogs?” I cried.

“They will complete our table. How did you sleep, my lady?”

“Splendid!”

“Do you love the country?”

“I begin to taste a greater joy in Nature.”

“I’m happy to hear it, my dear. My life is like the life of a bird. I
awake when the sun rises. I lay me in the bed at the bird’s dipping into
its nest. God made the night for keeping quiet. That is better than
prayer itself. I light neither lamp nor candle. I presume that every
young lady has certain secret work at night. Let me offer you a few
candles!”

We ate breakfast from the table by the fire.

Frogs supplied a special dish.

I couldn’t touch it, thinking of the songs of frogs that I had heard all
the night long.

Such a song! It was the muddy-booted song of the countryside. No
valuable quality in it, of course. But I should say that they tried the
best they could.

Poor Messrs. Frog!

I fancied the leg in my dish was that of one who volunteered to sing my
lullaby.

I almost cried in grief.

The poet was ready to wash the dishes. I was quick to snatch his job. My
uncle wiped them.

Stupid uncle!

He broke two dishes.

I collected the bones of the frogs, and buried them. On the stone above
them I wrote with a pencil:

“Tomb of Unknown Singers.”

What time was it when we were done with our breakfast?

I couldn’t tell.

The first thing I did yesterday was to stop the tick-tack of my watch,
and hide it in the lowest drawer.

The watch is a nuisance since I am thrown in THE GARDEN OF ETERNITY.