8th—How sad I felt, not to be greeted by even one star from my hotel
window last night!

I was disgusted with the poor taste of the coffee. Such a first-class
hotel! Coffee and maxim, I have said, should be of the very best.
Commonplace words with the golden heading of Maxim would be as cheap as
a negress with white powder. I would choose even a bread pudding rather
than a suspicious cup of coffee.

Uncle failed to secure a box of cigarettes.

The most delicate shape for smoking is the slender stalk of a cigarette.
The cigar ever so much impresses me as barbarous. Chicagoans might say
it was the only manly smoke.

Truly!

Chicago is the City of Man (whatever that means).

I’m glad that the young gentlemen with genteel canes under their arms
don’t open any cigar-stand conference here. Such an abomination in
Frisco!

No drones, whatever.

My uncle was going out sight-seeing with me in a silk hat.

I objected to it.

Plug hat doesn’t suit informal Chicago.

He changed his frock-coat for a sack-coat.

“Now, Uncle, you look more like a Chicago gentleman!” I said.

Yes, this is a plain sack-coat city.

He was fussing with a handkerchief. I said, laughing: “Never mind,
Uncle! I am sure the men don’t carry it here, since the women never
carry a purse in their hand.”

Isn’t it awful that one (even a stranger) ought to know everything in
Chicago? A slight question to the street people would be condemned as a
nuisance.

Even the policeman shows no chivalry.

I was sorry that the colour of his suit was bitterly faded.

Isn’t Chicago rich enough to furnish a new one?

I suppose many dogs must be hanging around here, because the policeman
arms himself with a piece of wood for chasing them off.

I should like to know if there is any blacker house than the City Hall.

It will be a matter of a short time before the Chicago River turns to
ink.

Then we went to observe the Lake of Michigan from Lincoln Park.

I scoffed at my absurdity in being ready with the first line for my poem
on the lake. If you knew that “O minstrel of Heaven and Truth!” was the
beginning, you would laugh surely. The lake wasn’t a huge singer like
the Pacific Ocean, at all.


[Illustration:

  Drawn by Genjiro Yeto
  “UNCLE. PLEASE COUNT HOW MANY STORIES IN THAT BUILDING.”
]


“Uncle, please, count how many stories in that building!” I begged.

Chicago structures “crush my little liver” completely. Did I ever dream
that I would eye such pillars of the sky in my life?

When I returned to my hotel, I declared that I would not open my trunk,
because my everyday dress was good enough for Chicago.

I regret to say that the gentlemen are so homely.