18th—

“MOST BELOVED:

        “Mamma was flogged with a bamboo rod some hundred times when she
was a girl, her exchanging of a word with a boy over the fence being
deemed an obscenity. My papa spent his lonely days in a room with
Confucious till one night a middleman left him with my mamma as with a
dolly. I do believe they never wrote any love letter.

“What would they say, I wonder, if they knew that their daughter had
taken to Love-Letter Writing as a profession in Amerikey?

“You shouldn’t censure my penury in writing, knowing that I am a musume
from such a source.

“Oscar, are your windows clean?

“Every window of my Willow Cottage was washed yesterday. Is there
anything more happy to see (your beautiful eyes excepted) than a shiny
window? I pressed my cheek to the window mirthfully, when Mr. Poet tried
to pinch it from the outside. My dearest, if he had been my very Mr.
Ellis!

“I made a discovery while I was trimming about the kitchen.

“Can you guess what it was?

“‘Love-Letter Writer!’

“‘Gift from Heaven!’ I said, trusting it would help me in my
composition.

“I lit a candle last night. I hid it behind the cover of such a huge
bible which I had borrowed for the purpose. I was heedful of two old men
who might disturb me, mistaking the light for a sign that something had
happened. Poor Mrs. Heine almost cried, she was so pleased to think that
I loved the Bible. Do I love it? Oho, ho, ho——

“Bakabakashi, how sad!

“The whole bunch of letters wasn’t fit for my taste at all, at all.

“I’m sorry that I used up two candles that were all we had in this hill.

“So, my darling, my letter has to be woven from my truest heart.

“Good morning, my sweet lord! How are you? Have you breakfasted? Did you
eat a beefsteak? I dislike a hearty morning eater. My ideal man
shouldn’t be given more than a cup of coffee and one trembling leaf of
bacon.

“Mr. Poet kills a frog every morning. He says that his fancy springs
like a pond singer when he tastes it. I should say that his idea bounds
too far in his case.

“Do you eat frog?

“I beseech you not to incline toward it.

“What should I do if your thought ran off from me?

“Failure of my life! Love is the whole business of woman, you know.

“Have you any shirt to mend?

“I have been fixing the poet’s.

“Pray, express it to me!

“Should you ask such a pleasure of any other girl, it would be a fatal
mistake for you. Remember, Oscar, that the Japanese girl is a mightily
jealous thing!

“My sweetheart, I dreamed a dream.

“You were a dragonfly, while I was a butterfly. It is needless to say
that we loved. One spring day we floated down along the canyon from a
mountain a thousand miles afar. Our path was suddenly barred by a dense
bush. We couldn’t attain to the Garden of Life without adventuring in
it. So, then, you stole in from one place, I from another. Alas! We got
parted forever.

“Isn’t that a terrible indication?

“Do you know any spell to turn it good? I am awfully agitated by it.

“Oh, kiss!

“Kiss me, my dear!

“I have to ascertain your love in it.

        “Your

            “MORNING GLORY”