10th—I made the acquaintance of a Japanese woman.

She must have been passing her thirty springs. I could be accurate in my
scale, being one of her sisterhood.

A cigar-stand keeper in Dupont Street.

Her name is O Fuji San.

Mrs. Wistaria brought a box of cigarettes that my uncle had ordered.

The morning is unoccupied in such a retail shop. Nobody puffs much
before lunch. She set herself in a tête-à-tête.

The chastity of a wife may be measured by her solo on her husband.
Woman’s greatest joy often lies in lamenting the faults of her teishu.

Mrs. Wistaria spoke of her husband’s being ill. I was to accept any
chance for squandering my feelings. I sympathised, repeating, “Komaru
nei! How sad!”

She said that she was going to leave the city for a week for the spring
of San Jose, to take care of her infirm dear.

“I fear I may lose my customers,” she flagged.

Her husband was afflicted with rheumatism.

I promised to call at her store.

Japs never visit an invalid without a present.

Champagne? It’s too ostentatious a drink. It’s like a highly rouged
woman.

The loving-eyed claret should be chosen.

I sent half a dozen bottles to Mrs. Wistaria’s.

A charity woman should be dressed in black and white. I went to Dupont
street, however, in my grey dress.

Her husband struggled to entertain me. His clumsy smile appeared all the
time at the wrong cue.

Poor Mr. What’s-his-name!

Their business was an absurdly small affair.

The whole stock hardly valued above one hundred dollars.

I thought I could conduct it rightly.

I was carried away by a sudden fancy.

“Can’t you leave your store in my hands, while you are away? Say yes!
No?” I pressed myself upon them eagerly.

They were amazed.

“High-born lady like you? Oh, no! Doshite, doshite! Think! Do you know
this is the toughest part of the town?” Mrs. Wistaria tried to make me
retreat.

I couldn’t listen to her, my whole soul being absorbed in my new
caprice.

I thought it remarkably romantic.

I left the store to bring uncle to talk the matter over.

Mrs. Wistaria’s store was neighboured by every saloon. The fuddling
sounds overflowed in song:


                    “Hello ma baby, hello ma honey——”