5th—

    “Matsuba Sama, the following letter creeps ‘under your
    honourable table.’

    “How is yourself?

    “I imagine that the breeze fills your bower with the odour of
    ume flowers. I am definite in saying that the Japanese ume is of
    different origin from the California plum tree, which has no
    expression in divine fragrance as I am told. I see your indolent
    face in the air, awaiting poetical inspiration on your bamboo
    piazza where the ume petals are beautifully blotched.

    “There are several months yet till we shall quarrel face-to-face
    over the superiority of English or Oriental literature.

    “Miss Pine Leaf, I—or rather we—have said farewell to Frisco.

    “It was sad that I never saw any battleship (excepting one
    shamefaced gunboat) in the bay of the Golden Gate. A bay without
    battleship is like a door without a lock.

    “Can you fancy any Japanese city without soldiers?

    “American soldier?

    “I am sorry to say that I have met no soldier in my four months
    at the Pacific.

    “I presume that the practical Meriken jins can’t bear to see
    such a useless ornamentation. Yes! Soldiers are degenerating, in
    my opinion, to the rank of a fireplace on a hot summer day. How
    stimulating, however, was the sound of the fearless hoofs of a
    cavalier! When the sabres of a regiment flashed in the sunlight,
    I could never keep from fluttering my paper handkerchief.

    “I shall not excite myself in such a joy in Amerikey.

    “I made the acquaintance of one colonel at Mrs. Willis’. He is a
    jolly business man. Just think of a colonel plus merchant! Is it
    possible? He changes his white shirt every morning, and shines
    his shoes twice a day. I should say that he will carry a sheet
    and opera hat, and leave his gun behind, whenever he is summoned
    to a battle-field. Possibly he has hidden his colonelship in his
    trunk.

    “I found afterward that every old gentleman is a colonel or
    judge.

    “Everything in California is made for just a woman.

    “California gentleman isn’t privileged to raise one question
    against a lady. He is provided with all sorts of exclamations to
    please the woman. If he should ever miss one dinner with his
    wife, he would be divorced in court on the morrow.

    “Uncle says that the Eastern gents are not so devoted to the
    lady.

    “If it be true!

    “Am I now entering the city of Man?

    “How sad!

    “Have you any experience of writing by the car-window?

    “I feel a strange delight in scanning my romantically tremulous
    handwriting. A certain famous Jap penman takes wine before he
    begins, for the sake of putting his mind in a fine frenzy, as
    you know. The shaking of the car produces in me the same effect.
    Isn’t this letter great enough to be honoured on your tokonama?

    “Can you ever imagine how vast Amerikey is?

    “Yesterday our car ran all day long, over the mountains and
    prairies, seeing only a few huts.

    “O such a snowstorm in the evening!

    “The train rushed like a maddened dragon. It was verily an
    astonishingly ghastly spectacle as any human thought could ever
    picture. I thrilled with a feeling of tragic ecstasy, which is
    the highest emotion.

    “Can you recollect that you and I once stood under the darkest
    rains without an umbrella, and laughed hysterically?

    “I love shocking emotion.

    “Since I was touched by the continental air, I measure my lungs
    dilating two inches bigger. How sorry I shall be for you when I
    return! You are so tiny! I expect myself to be five inches
    higher within the next few months.

    “Amerikey is the country where everything grows, don’t you know?

    “Even the stars look a deal larger than in Japan.

    “Looking back at the Rocky Mountains,

                “Yours,

                  “ASAGAO”