18th—My letter to Miss Pine Leaf (who wept with me reading Keats’
love-letters one mournful night) is as follows:

    “MATSUBA SAN:

                   ‘Hitofude mairase soro.

    ‘I have the honour to present a brief writing.’

    “Let me omit the shopworn form of Japanese letter-writing! Its
    redundant ‘honourables’ are more cheap than honourable.

    “Satetoya!

    “Shall I begin my letter with a deep bow?

    “Bow?

    “I use it occasionally before Meriken San for sport’s sake. But
    it is degenerating, in my opinion, to comic opera, like the
    tortoise-shell-framed spectacles of a Chinese doctor.

    “Now I address you with a thousand kisses.

    “The kiss is the thing to begin with for up-to-date girls.

    “It is useful, as a poem is useful in filling up space in
    magazine-making. Woman—even a loftily learned American
    woman—cannot be ready always with her rhetoric of expression.
    The kiss comes to her relief in the crisis whenever she fails in
    speech.

    “The kiss is everything.

    “The Jap girl is intimate with the art of crying.

    “A kiss is as eloquent as a tear.

    “I suppose the cleverness of American woman is graded by the way
    she handles it. It strikes me that every white girl is perfectly
    at home with it.

    “She is awfully bright.

    “You wonder why she is so?

    “There is one reason that I can tell you. It is because she has
    a serious job to pick out her husband herself. I don’t think it
    is fair to blame her growing insipid after marriage. Every one
    feels tired when a weighty work is done. What would be her doom
    if she were stupid? An old maid is such a sad sight, like a
    broken clock, or a cradle after baby’s death. Isn’t it dreadful
    to have nothing to rejoice in but a customary tea or books?
    Literary critic is one occupation left for her. Worse than
    death!

    “I am pained to state that our brown sisters are extremely
    behind time.

    (“There are lots of exceptions, of course, like honourable you
    and Miss M. G.)

    “I am talking of common Jap musumes.

    “Naturally so.

    “They are like those waiting at the station for the next train.
    They have only to doze and wait for the footsteps of a
    matchmaker with a young man.

    “I am grateful to the Nippon government for stimulating
    education in women.

    “But I advise her to imprison all the matchmakers. Then the
    girls will wake up at once, like one who has everything on her
    back after papa’s passing.

    “That is one process to brighten them, I think.

    “Am I not logical?

    “Your last tegami questioned me whether the American lady was
    charming.

    “Are you attentive to western sea painting?

    “How does it impress you when you are close by it? Only a jumble
    of paint, isn’t it? So with Meriken woman!

    “You should be off half a dozen steps to estimate her beautiful
    captivation. You would be horrified, otherwise, by her hairy
    skin.

    “I love her.

    “She has no headache like the Japs. (By the way, I will call
    Japan, hereafter, the country of headache.) She lives in a
    comedy.

    “Nothing turns bad in Amerikey.

    “‘Tragedy To Be a Woman,’ could only be seen on a fiction thrown
    in a moth-trodden second-hand store.

    “Police never bother.

    “Such a deliverance!

    “I am delighted with my Meriken Kenbutsu.

    “Sayonara!

                   Yours,

                      “MORNING GLORY”