12th—I invited my precious Ada to my store to dine _à la Japonaise_.

One Jap restaurant catered to it.

“Irrashaimashi! Condescend to enter!” I showered my wooden-clogged
greeting over Ada.

From “The Klondyke,” my neighbouring saloon, a nigger song was flapping
in.


          “If you ain’t got no money, you needn’t come round.”


Happy Ada San!

She was about to join in it, when I brought her into my great
dining-room.

(Beg pardon, it was a paltry kitchen!)

Everything was seen on the table.

Japanese dinner has no strict order of courses. You are a frolicsome
butterfly among the dishes set like flowers before you. You may flit
straight to any one which catches your whim.

“Take your honourable chop-sticks!” I said.

Poor Miss Ada!

“How shall I manage with one stick?” she raised her eyelids in
questioning meekness.

I bade her to split the stick in two. It was a brand new wooden one. I
showed her how to finger it.

She nibbled a bit from each dish. Every time she tasted she looked upon
me with a suspicious smile.

And how she slipped her sticks at the critical moment!

The sight amused me hugely.

“How dare I swallow raw fishes!” she said shrinking.

“What delight I taste in them!” I slammed back at her timidity.

Then I dipped a few cuts of the fishes into a porcelain soy pan for my
mouth.

I even trampled into her fish-dish by and by.

She was literally terrified.

The feast was over. I said, “Go yukkuri! Honourable
not-to-be-in-a-hurry!” I slid away.

I tied my white apron like a shop girl. I was glad that I did not forget
to push a lead-pencil through my hair. I presented myself to Ada
carrying a cigarette box.

“Will you buy tobacco for your lord?”

I spread the box before her.

“How much for one packet,” she asked with the charming arrogance of a
customer.

She was acting also.

“To-day is the memorial day of Lord Nono Sama. My sweet Oku San, allow
me to make a reduction!”

Then we laughed.


[Illustration:

  Drawn by Genjiro Yeto
  “HOW DARE I SWALLOW RAW FISHES!”
]