25th—The spring hills were coquetting like a tea-house maiden, singing:


                      “The air is lovely like wine;
                      Come, Lord! Come, Lord!”


The curtain for the spring comedy has not yet risen.

Already the picnic band invades.

To-day I will make myself mistress of a hillside coffee-house.

The poet—the eternally sweet poet—hastened to borrow a tent from a
neighbour.

He set it on the greenest spot of grass before my cottage. I must excuse
his conceit, he entreated, in showing his skill by baking a cake for me.

“Accept my hundred arigatos!”

I bowed demonstratively.

I pasted a paper—such a bashful brown piece from a butcher’s table—with
the sign of

                            “BISHOPS’ REST.”

The poet tacked “Ten Cents for Coffee and Cake” on the fence by the
tent.

The cups (what a shame that their arms were all off) were rinsed, when
he showed me an imperial poundcake, declaring it his own manufacture.

At three o’clock I was fully prepared for an honorable guest.

The coffee on the oil-stove was surging, when two parties went by, not
spending even one look at my sign.

“Times are awfully hard, I think. People have not luxury enough to spare
even a dime,” I murmured sadly.

I said that I would have no business, if I didn’t make the next party my
victim.

I appeared before the tent, when a few girls—who were born for laughing,
but not for thinking—came close by.

“Will you rest and taste the cake that the poet made, ladies?” I said.

“That’s nice,” they said, rolling into the tent.

I served them with coffee and cake.

“Is this surely the poet’s cake? It looks like baker’s cake,” one girl
said.

“Mr. Poet assured me it was of his own making,” I replied in cool
reserve.

After they left, I scrutinised the cake. Oya! A little bakery mark was
seen.

“Mighty liar!” I grumbled.

Abrupt clouds clouded the sun. The winds scolded bitterly. I decided
there was no business remaining.

I called Mr. Heine and uncle into the Bishops’ Rest.

“Your cake was fine, Mr. Poet.”

“I know it, Miss Morning Glory. I’m a pretty good cook, you see. I
cooked once in a Sierra camp for fifty miners. I was paid twenty dollars
a week. Alas! It was the biggest money I ever earned.”

“By the way, Mr. Heine, the bakery sent a bill for you.”

I placed before him a slip that I had prepared for the purpose.

“Ha! Ha, ha, ha!”

His open laughter was as from a simple Faun.

I noticed, afterward, a black mass heaped in a ditch. The whole
situation grew plain to me. He couldn’t bake, but only burn, in the
oven, and had despatched his neighbour for the cake.

Dear Poet!