7th—Rainy day!

The heavily reserved weather confines me in the pose of genius.

My hair lounged down my shoulders. Disorder is the first step in being a
genius, I fancy. My eyes should be rolled up to the sky in divine
tragicalness.

I have had a greediness for the name of novelist.

To-day I found myself in the crisis where I must scribble or die.

I regret to say that mine is a love story also, as every beginner’s book
has been. I hope everybody will be contented with “The Destiny,” a
respectable title for my fiction. Who says it is the style of name
employed one hundred years ago?

The book will be concluded with three hundred pages.

Now I wonder whether a long story is in demand.

Chapter I, is as follows:


                          WHEN THE MOON ROSE.

This story begins when the moon rose.

Its silvery rays—it was six P.M. of April—fell on the Shiba park in
laughter.

My heroine jogged along into the park, singing a light song.


                 “Miss Honourable Moon, how old are you?
                  Thirteen and seven, you say?
                  You are young enough to marry——”


Let me explain about her a bit!

Her name is O Hana San.

Thirteen years old. Thirteen? It is the age when the flower of girlhood
starts to bloom.

Bewitching Hana!

Do you remember a well by the glorious cherry tree in the park? The
’rikisha men moisten their parched lips at the “Heaven-Sent.” That is
its name, sir.

Miss Hana looked down into the well.

She began to adjust her hair. The first worry of a girl after thirteen
would naturally be about her hair.

She gazed up to the cherry blossoms and exclaimed:

“Utsukushii nah! Lovely!”

Then she found her face again in the well-mirror, thinking what a
charming O Hana San it would make with the flowers on her hair.

My worthy readers, I suppose it is the time some one must enter.

He came.

He was a little boy.

I will not mention his name just yet.

He came close to her and pinched her little back. Both blushed, facing
each other. They were quite strangers.

The evening zephyrs stirred the cherry blossoms. They planted themselves
silently among the falling petals, as ethereal as snow.

“I delight to stand in the storm of petals, don’t you?” Hana inclined
her head a trifle in speaking.

The woman always speaks first.

“Let me see your school book!” again she said.

“Why?”

He put it in her tiny hand.

“Thanks! Arigato!”

She bowed low. When she put the book on her shoulder, she was running
away, singing:


                “Miss Honourable Moon, how old are you?”


The boy stood aghast.

                 *     *     *     *     *     *     *

The author of this story found O Hana San again by the same well on the
next evening.

The boy’s book in her hand, of course.

She paced around the well, muttering:

“He must come, because the moon rose.”

But he was not seen.

                  *       *       *       *       *

My next chapter will be “The Second Meeting.”