SAN FRANCISCO, night, 21st

“Good-bye, Mr. Belgic!”

I delight in personifying everything as a gentleman.


What does it mean under the sun! Kitsune ni tsukamareta wa! Evil fox, I
suppose, got hold of me. “Gentlemen, is this real Amerikey?” I
exclaimed.

Oya, ma, my Meriken dream was a complete failure.

Did I ever fancy any sky-invading dragon of smoke in my own America?

The smoke stifled me.

Why did I lock up my perfume bottle in my trunk?

I hardly endured the smell from the wagons at the wharf. Their rattling
noise thrust itself into my head. A squad of Chinamen there puffed
incessantly the menacing smell of cigars.

Were I the mayor of San Francisco—how romantic “the Mayor, Miss Morning
Glory” sounds!—I would not pause a moment before erecting free
bath-houses around the wharf.

I never dreamed that human beings could cast such an insulting smell.

The smell of honourable wagon drivers is the smell of a M-O-N-K-E-Y.

Their wild faces also prove their likeness to it.

They must have furnished all the evidence to Mr. Darwin. “The better
part lies some distance from here,” said my uncle.

I exclaimed how inhospitable the Americans were to receive visitors from
the back door of the city.

We are not empty-stomached tramps rapping the kitchen door for a crust
of bread.

                  *       *       *       *       *

We refused hotel carriage.

We walked from the Oriental wharf for the sake of the street
sight-seeing.

Tamageta wa! A house was whirling along the street. Look at the
horseless car! How could it be possible to pull it with a rope under
ground!

Everything reveals a huge scale of measurement.

The continental spectacle is different from that of our islands.

We 40,000,000 Japs must raise our heads from wee bits of land. There’s
no room to stretch elbows. We have to stay like dwarf trees.

I shouldn’t be surprised if the Americans exclaim in Japan, “What a
petty show!”

Such a riotous rush! What a deafening uproar!

The lazy halt of a moment on the street must have been regarded, I
fancied, as a violation of the law.

I wondered whether one dozen were not slain each hour on Market Street
by the cars.

Cars! Cars! And cars!

It was no use to look beautiful in such a cyclone city. Not even one
gentleman moved his admiring eyes to my face.

How sad!

I thought it must be some festival.

“No, the usual Saturday throng!” my uncle said.

Then I asked myself whether Tokio streets were only like a midnight of
this city.

My beloved minister kept his mouth open—what heavy lips he had!—amazed
at the high edifices.

“O ho, that’s astonishing!” he cried, throwing his sottish eyes on the
clock of the _Chronicle_ building.

“Boys are commenting on you,” I whispered.

I beseeched him not to act so droll.

He tossed out in his careless fashion his everlasting heroic laughter,
“Ha, ha, ha——”

A hawkish lad—I have not seen one sleepy fellow yet—drew near the
minister shortly after we left the wharf, and begged to carry his bag.

He was only too glad to be assisted. The brown diplomatist thought it a
loving deed toward a foreigner.

He bowed after some blocks, thanking the boy with a hearty “arigato.”

“Sir, you have to pay me two bits!”

His hand went to his pocket, when my uncle tapped his stooping back,
speaking: “This is the country of eternal ‘pay, pay, pay,’ old man!”

                  *       *       *       *       *

“What does a genuine American beggar look like?” was my old question.

The Meriken beggar my friend saw at Yokohama park was dressed up in a
swallow-tail coat. Emerson’s essays were in his hand. He was such a
genteel Mr. Beggar, she said.

I often heard that everybody is a millionaire in America. I thought it
likely that I should see a swell Mr. Beggar among the Americans.

How many a time had I planned to make a special trip to Yokohama for
acquaintance with the honourable Emerson scholar!

Alas, it was merely a fancy!

I have seen Mr. Beggar on the street.

He didn’t appear in the formal dignity of a dress coat.

Where was his Emerson?

He was not unlike his Oriental brothers, after all.

He stood, because he wasn’t used to kneeling like the Japs.

The only difference was that he carried pencils instead of a musical
instrument.

He is a merchant,—this is a business country,—while the Japanese Mr.
Beggar is an artist, I suppose.

                  *       *       *       *       *

My little gold watch pointed eleven.

I have been writing for some hours about my first impression of the city
from the wharf, and my journey from there to this Palace Hotel.

The number of my room is 489.

I fear I may not return if I once go out. It’s so hard to remember the
number.

The large mirror reflected me as being so very small in the big room.

Such a great room with high ceiling!

I don’t feel at home at all.

Not a petal of flower. No inviting picture on the wall!

I was tired of hearing the artificial greeting, “Irasshai mashi,” or
“Honourable welcome,” of the eternally bowing Japanese hotel attendants.

But the too simple treatment of ’Merican hotel is hardly to my taste.

Not even one girl to wait on me here!

No “honourable tea and cake.”