Oct. 3rd, on Munday, at 11 of the clok before none, I delivered my
two rolls of the Quene’s Majesties title unto herself in the garden
at Richemond, who appointed after dynner to heare furder of the
matter. Therfore betwene one and two afternone, I was sent for into
her highnes Pryvy Chamber, where the Lord Threasurer allso was, who,
having the matter slightly then in consultation, did seme to dowt
much that I had or could make the argument probable for her highnes’
title so as I pretended. Wheruppon I was to declare to his honor
more playnely, and at his leyser, what I had sayd and could say
therin, which I did on Tuesday and Wensday following, at his
chamber, where he used me very honorably on his behalf. Oct. 7th,
on Fryday I cam to my Lord Threasorer, and he being told of my
being without, and allso I standing before him at his comming furth,
did not or would not speak to me, I dowt not of some new greif
conceyved. Oct. 10th, the Quene’s Majestie, to my great cumfort
(hora quinta), cam with her trayn from the court and at my dore
graciously calling me to her, on horsbak, exhorted me briefly to
take my mother’s death patiently, and withall told me that the Lord
Threasorer had gretly commended my doings for her title, which he
had to examyn, which title in two rolls he had browght home two
howrs before; she remembred allso how at my wive’s death it was
her fortune likewise to call uppon me.[p] At 4 of the clok in the
morning my mother Jane Dee dyed at Mortlak; she made a godly ende:
God be praysed therfore! She was 77 yere old. Oct. 20th, I had by my
jury at Geldhall £100 damages awarded me against Vincent Murphyn the
cosener. Oct. 22nd, with much ado I had judgment against Murfin at
Geldhall. My mervaylous horsnes and in manner spechelesnes toke me,
being nothing at all otherwise sick. Oct. 25th, Morrice Kyffin
departed from me with my leave. Nov. 2nd, the Lord Threasorer sent
me a haunche of venison. Thomas Suttley had the bishop of Canterbury
his letter for Sir Richard. Nov. 3rd, I writt to my Lord Threasurer.