Aug. 3rd, all the night very strange knocking and rapping in my
chamber. Aug. 4th, and this night likewise. Katharin was sent home
from nurse Maspely, of Barnes, for fear of her mayd’s sicknes, and
goodwife Benet gave her suck. Aug. 11th, Katharine Dee was shifted
to nurse Garret at Petersham on Fryday, the next day after St.
Lawrence day, being the 11th day of the month; my wife went on foot
with her, and Ellen Cole, my mayd, George and Benjamin, in very
great showres of rayn. Aug. 12th, recepi literas a D. Doctore Andrea
Hess occultæ philosophiæ studioso, per Richardi Hesketh amici mei,
Antwerpiæ agentis, diligentiam in negociis meis, et recepi, una cum
literis, Mercurii Mensitam seu Sigillam Planetarum. Aug. 26th, abowt
8½ (at night) a strange meteore in forme of a white clowde crossing
galaxiam, whan it lay north and sowth over our zenith; this clowd
was at length from the S.E. to the S.W. sharp at both endes, and in
the west ende it was forked for a while; it was abowt sixty degrees
high, it lasteth an howr, all the skye clere abowt, and fayr
starshyne.

Sept.[s] 5th, Roger Cook, who had byn with me from his 14 yeres of
age till 28, of a melancholik nature, pycking and devising occasions
of just cause to depart on the suddayn, abowt 4 of the clok in the
afternone requested of me lycense to depart, wheruppon rose whott
words between us; and he, imagining with hisself that he had the
12 of July deserved my great displeasure and finding himself barred
from vew of my philosophicall dealing with Mr. Henrik, thowght
that he was utterly recest from intended goodnes toward him.
Notwithstanding Roger Cook his unseamely dealing, I promised him, yf
he used himself toward me now in his absens, one hundred pounds[t]
as sone as of my own clene hability I myght spare so much; and
moreover, if he used himself well in lif toward God and the world,
I promised him some pretty alchimicall experiments, whereuppon he
might honestly live. Sept. 7th, Roger Cook went for alltogether from
me. Sept. 29th, Robert Gardner, of Shrewsbury, cam to my servyce.

  [Footnote s: Dr. Dee, in the Rawlinson MS. just quoted,
  observes, in his notes on this month, “Mr. Harry Waters went
  away the 2nd day, malcontent. John Dee, Jesus bless me!”]

  [Footnote t: This probably gave rise to the anecdote which is
  related in MS. Ashm. 1788, fol. 147, viz. that “he revealed to
  one Roger Cooke the great secret of the elixar, as he called it,
  of the salt of metalls, the projection whereof was one upon an
  hundred.”]