Feb. 2nd, Rolandus Dee baptizatus. Feb. 3rd, Mr. Savile, Mr. Powil
the yonger, travaylors, Mr. Ottomeen his sonne, cam to be acquaynted
with me. Feb. 4th, Mr. Edmunds of the Privie Chamber, Mr. Lee who
had byn in Moschovia, cam to be acquaynted with me. Feb. 11th, the
Quene lying at Richemond went to Mr. Secretary Walsingham to dynner;
she coming by my dore gratiously called me to her, and so I went by
her horse side as far as where Mr. Hudson dwelt. Ερ μαιεστι αξεδ με
οβοσκυρελι οφ μουνσιευρἱς στατε: διξι βιοθανατος εριτ. Roland went
with his nurse to her howse to Estshene. Feb. 18th, the Lady
Walsingham cam suddenly into my howse very freely, and shortly after
that she was gone cam Syr Francys himself and Mr. Dyer. Feb. 24th,
Jane churched. Feb. 26th, I delivered my boke to the Lord Threasorer
for the correction of the Calender.[x]

  [Footnote x: This work, although never entirely printed, created
  much sensation at the time, and was the cause of considerable
  controversy among the politicians as well as literati. The
  Memorial on this subject which Dee presented to the Privy
  Council has been printed by Hearne and others, but it is not
  generally known that the original manuscript of the actual
  treatise on the correction of the Calendar is still preserved
  in Ashmole’s library, No. 1789, and is the very book which Dee
  alludes to above. It is inscribed “to the Right Honorable and my
  singular good Lorde, the Lorde Burghley, Lorde Threasorer of
  Englande,” with the following verses:--

    “Το ὁτι and το διοτι,
    I shew the thing and reason why;
    At large, in breif, in middle wise,
    I humbly give a playne advise;
    For want of tyme, the tyme untrew
    Yf I have myst, commaund anew
    Your honor may. So shall you see
    That love of truth doth govern me.”

  The work itself is entitled, “A playne Discourse and humble
  Advise for our Gratious Queene Elizabeth, her most Excellent
  Majestie to peruse and consider, as concerning the needful
  Reformation of the Vulgar Kalender for the civile yeres and
  daies accompting, or verifyeng, according to the tyme truely
  spent.”]