Nov. 23rd, Mr. Francis Garland and Edward Rowly, Mr. Dyer his
servant, went from Trebon toward England. I writ to the Quene’s
Majestie, Mr. Dyer, Mr. Yong, and Edward Hilton. Dec. 4th, I gave to
Mr. Ed. Kelley my Glass, so highly and long estemed of our Quene,
and the Emperor Randolph the second, de quo in præfatione Euclidis
fit mentio.[dd] The letter of 500,000 ducats required. Dec. 7th,
γρεατ φρενδκιπ προμισιδ φορ μανι, ανδ τυυο ουνκες οφ θε θινγ. Dec.
13th, Mr. Edward Kelley gave me the water, erth and all. Dec. 14th,
Edmond Hilton cam again to Trebon from England. Dec. 18th, I did
understand by Mr. Kelley that my glass which he had given to my Lord
Rosenberg, the Lord Rosenberg had given it to the Emperor. Dec.
23rd, I went to the new made citie Kaiser Radnef Stadt, by Budneis,
to ovirsee what Joachim Reimer had done abowt my coaches making.
Radulphus Sagiensis Gallus Normannus, venit Trebonam, chimiæ et
naturalis magiæ studiosus.

  [Footnote dd: This refers to the earliest English translation of
  Euclid by Billingsley, which was published in 1570, with a long
  preface by Dr. Dee. Professor De Morgan is of opinion that the
  translation also was by Dee, or that Billingsley may have been
  only a pupil who worked immediately under his directions. The
  passage to which Dee alludes is as follows:-- “a man to be
  curstly affrayed of his owne shadow; yea, so much to feare, that
  if you, being alone nere a certaine glasse, and proffer, with
  dagger or sword, to foyne at the glasse, you shall suddenly be
  moved to give backe (in maner) by reason of an image appearing
  in the ayre betwene you and the glasse with like hand, sword,
  or dagger, and with like quicknes, foyning at your very eye,
  likewise as you do at the glasse. Straunge this is to heare of,
  but more mervailous to behold then these my wordes cam signifie;
  and neverthelesse by demonstration opticall the order and cause
  therof is certified; even so, as the effect is consequent.”
  I refer the reader also to Mr. Barlow’s History of Optics in the
  Encyclopedia Metropolitana.]