Oct. 11th, Mr. Cumber cam to me. Oct. 14th, payd Nurse Barwik six
shillings for one month ending on the seventh, being Wensday. Oct.
15th, this afternoone and all the night following a great storme of
wynde at North-West. One Prychard that had marryed Proctor Lewes his
widdow, demaunded £24 of me uppon an obligation of £64: whereof by
the very note on the bak of the same £48 is payd, so that £16 only
remayne and not £24, as he unduely demanded: which £16 I challenged
for the costes of his sonne John, three yeres and longer being with
me in Mortlak, and having also his lerning free. Notwithstanding my
wife afraid payd a pownd or two to Mr. Lewys of that £16, and yet
Prichard will go to law. Nov. 12th, the Archbishop of Canterbury
gave me £5 in ryalls and angels circa horam decimam matutina. Nov.
20th, Her Majestie cam to Richemond. Nov. 27th, the Quene’s
Majestie, being at Richemont, graciously sent for me. I cam to her
at three quarters of the clok afternone, and she sayd she wold send
me something to kepe Christmas with. Nov. 28th, Mr. Candish on
Saterday gave my wife forty shillings, and on Tuesday after sent £10
in ryalls and angels, and before he sent me £20, £32 in all. My
cousin Mr. Thomas Junes cam in the ende of the terme about St.
Andrew’s even. Dec. 1st, Her Majestie commaunded Mr. John Herbert,
Master of Requests, to write to the Commissioners in my behalf. Dec.
2nd, order taken by the Commissioners for my howse and goods. Her
Majesty told Mr. Candish that she wold send me an hundred angels to
kepe my Christmas withall. Dec. 3rd, goodwife Tyndale payd for
Antony his lodging for eleven wekes dew at his going away 5_s._
6_d._, and before she had for seven wekes. Dec. 4th, the Quene’s
Majestie called for me at my dore circa 3½ a meridie as she passed
by, and I met her at Estshene gate, where she graciously, putting
down her mask, did say with mery chere, “I thank thee, Dee; there
was never promisse made but it was broken or kept.” I understode her
Majesty to mean of the hundred angels she promised to have sent me
this day, as she yester-night told Mr. Richard Candish. Dec. 6th,
Mr. Thomas Griffith my cosen from Llanbeder cam to see me, and lay
all night with me, and allso Mr. Thomas Jones, and in the Monday
morning went by water to London, and so the same day homeward.
A meridie circa 3ª recepi a Regina Domina £50. Dec. 8th, at Chelsey
disputing with Doctor Mather, bishop of Bristow; in danger of water
hora 5½ I stayed at Chelsey. Dec. 14th, the Quene’s Majestie called
for me at my dore as she rod by to take ayre, and I met her at
Estshene gate. Dec. 16th, Mr. Candish receyved from the Quene’s
Majestie warrant by word of mowth to assure me to do what I wold in
philosophie and alchimie, and none shold chek, controll, or molest
me; and she sayd that she wold ere long send me £50 more to make up
the hundred pound. I gave Mr. Candish the Bishop of Scotland his
conclusion with marchaunts. Mr. Candish went from Mortlak at four of
clok at nyght toward London and so into Suffolk. Dec. 18th, Mr.
Robert Maynard natus circa horam decimam antei meridiem Londini.