Jan. 19th, the cobler with the mad woman. Jan. 25th, I sent my
letters to Mr. Lording for Mr. Pontoys to Dantsiz. Jan. 26th, I cam
to Mr. Web to the Marshalsea. Jan. 27th, Thomas Richardson cam while
I was at London, and so I fownd him at home; and agayn he promised
me his working of forty dayes. Jan. 28th, Mr. Vander Laen promised
on 26 day to begyn his work of fixing _lunam_. Madinia somwhat
sickly. Robert Wood, visitted with spirituall creatures, had comfort
by conference. Jan. 31st, Mr. Vander Laen began his work of _luna_,
five myle sowth from Glocester. Mr. Morgan Treherne told me of Mr.
Lawrence of eighty yeres old. Mr. Thomas Sharp, chief stuard to the
Lady Russell at Bisham, is master and good frende to Thomas
Richardson, as he himselfe told me. Theodore Dee from the myddle of
this month had his left ey blud-shotten from the side next his
temple, very sore bludshotten, above thre wekes contynuing. Feb.
1st, Mr. John Ask sent me two little dubble gilt bowles waying
thirteen ownces and a half. Feb. 7th, Sir Thomas Wilks offer
philosophicall cam to my hands by Mr. Morice Kiffyn. This day the
Archbishop of Canterbury inclined sometyme to the request of
dispensation. Feb. 20th, 21st, Theodor fell sick in the Shrovtyde
weke, and so into a tertian ague. March 10th, uppon a flight of
feare bycause of Mr. Webbes his sending for me to come to him to the
Marshalsea, now when he looked to be condemned on the Monday or
Tuesday next. March 16th, Barthilmew Hikman cam up. March 18th, Mr.
Heriot cam to me. March 20th, I did before Barthilmew Hikman pay
Letice her full yere’s wagis ending the 7th day of Aprill next; her
wagis being four nobles, an apron, a payr of hose and shoes. March
23rd, I gave Barthilmew Hikman the nag which the Lord Keper had
given me. Barthilmew Hikman and William his brother went homward.
Magus disclosed by frendeship of Mr. Richard Alred. Α συδδεν πανγ οφ
ανγερ βετυυενε Μ. Νικολς ανδ με. March 28th, Mr. Francis Garland
browght me Sir Edward Kelley and his brother’s letters. March 31st,
a great fit of the stone in my left kydney: all day I could do but
three or four drops of water, but I drunk a draught of white wyne
and salet oyle, and after that, crabs’ eys in powder with the bone
in the carp’s head, and abowt four of the clok I did eat tosted cake
buttered, and with suger and nutmeg on it, and drunk two great
draughts of ale with it; and I voyded within an howr much water, and
a stone as big as an Alexander seed. God be thanked! Five shillings
to Robert Webb, part of his wagis.