July 28th, a letter from Mr. Oliver Carter, Fellow of Manchester
College. I writt agayn to him the same day. July 29th, Mistres Mary
Nevel went to London, and so into Kent. July 31st, the Cowntess of
Warwik did this evening thank her Majestie in my name, and for
me, for her gift of the Wardenship of Manchester. She toke it
gratiously; and was sorry that it was so far from hens, but that
some better thing neer hand shall be fownd for me; and, if
opportunitie of tyme wold serve, her Majestie wold speak with me
herself. I had a bill made by Mr. Wood, one of the clerks of the
signet, for the first frutes given me by her Majestie. Aug. 2nd, at
Mr. Cosener his table at Grenewich: I spak that wich greatly liked
Mr. Sergeant Oliver Lloyd; wold have disputed agayn. Aug. 5th,
very rayny all day, and had the wynde north E. and W. Aug. 12th,
I receyved Sir Edward Kellyes letters of the Emperor’s, inviting me
to his servyce again. Aug. 14th, peperit Jana (nutu Dei) circa horam
quartam a meridie. Aug. 27th, Margarite Dee baptized hora 4½ a
meridie. Godfather, the Lord Keper; his deputy, Mr. Crowne.
Godmothers, the Cowntess of Cumberland, her deputy Mistres Davis;
and the Cowntess of Essex, her deputy Mistres Bele. Barthilmew
Hikman cam to Mortlak on his own busines. Sept. 2nd, the spider at
ten of the clok at night suddenly on my desk, and suddenly gon;
a most rare one in bygnes and length of feet. I was in a great study
at my desk. Sept. 6th I gave Richard 2_s._ 6_d._ part of his wagis,
when he went to his grandfather. Sept. 13th, I dyned with the Erle
of Derby at Russell Howse, Mr. Thymothew and Mr. John Statfeldt,
German, being there. Sept. 14th, to Elizabeth Feeld _2s._ for the
taylor. Sept. 22nd, Elizabeth Feeld went from my servyce. I dined
with the Erle of Darby. Sept. 26th, £6 borrowed of my cosen William
Hetherley for fourteen days to pay for Barthilmew Hikman. Sept.
29th, Margery Stubble of Hownslow, our dry nurse, entred into the
yere of her servyce begynning on Michaelmas Day, and is to have £3
her yeres wagis and a gown cloth of russet. Edward Edwards began his
yere of serving me allso on Michelmas Day, and he must have 40_s._
for his yere’s wagis, and a lyvery.