3rd. Drank my morning draft at Harper’s, and was told there that the
soldiers were all quiet upon promise of pay. Thence to St. James’s Park,
and walked there to my place for my flageolet and then played a little,
it being a most pleasant morning and sunshine. Back to Whitehall, where
in the guard-chamber I saw about thirty or forty ‘prentices of the
City, who were taken at twelve o’clock last night and brought prisoners
hither. Thence to my office, where I paid a little more money to some
of the soldiers under Lieut.-Col. Miller (who held out the Tower against
the Parliament after it was taken away from Fitch by the Committee of
Safety, and yet he continued in his office). About noon Mrs. Turner came
to speak with me, and Joyce, and I took them and shewed them the manner
of the Houses sitting, the doorkeeper very civilly opening the door for
us. Thence with my cozen Roger Pepys,

     [Roger Pepys, son of Talbot Pepys of Impington, a barrister of the
     Middle Temple, M.P.  for Cambridge, 1661-78, and Recorder of that
     town, 1660-88.  He married, for the third time, Parnell, daughter
     and heiress of John Duke, of Workingham, co.  Suffolk, and this was
     the wedding for which the posy ring was required.]

it being term time, we took him out of the Hall to Priors, the Rhenish
wine-house, and there had a pint or two of wine and a dish of anchovies,
and bespoke three or four dozen bottles of wine for him against his
wedding. After this done he went away, and left me order to call and
pay for all that Mrs. Turner would have. So we called for nothing more
there, but went and bespoke a shoulder of mutton at Wilkinson’s to be
roasted as well as it could be done, and sent a bottle of wine home
to my house. In the meantime she and I and Joyce went walking all over
White Hall, whither General Monk was newly come, and we saw all his
forces march by in very good plight and stout officers. Thence to my
house where we dined, but with a great deal of patience, for the mutton
came in raw, and so we were fain to stay the stewing of it. In the
meantime we sat studying a Posy

     [It is supposed that the fashion of having mottoes inscribed on
     rings was of Roman origin.  In the fourteenth and fifteenth
     centuries the posy was inscribed on the outside of the ring, and in
     the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries it was placed inside.  A
     small volume was published in 1674, entitled “Love’s Garland: or
     Posies for Rings, Handkerchers and Gloves, and such pretty tokens
     that Lovers send their Loves.”]

for a ring for her which she is to have at Roger Pepys his wedding.
After dinner I left them and went to hear news, but only found that the
Parliament House was most of them with Monk at White Hall, and that
in his passing through the town he had many calls to him for a free
Parliament, but little other welcome. I saw in the Palace Yard how
unwilling some of the old soldiers were yet to go out of town without
their money, and swore if they had it not in three days, as they were
promised, they would do them more mischief in the country than if
they had staid here; and that is very likely, the country being all
discontented. The town and guards are already full of Monk’s soldiers.
I returned, and it growing dark I and they went to take a turn in the
park, where Theoph. (who was sent for to us to dinner) outran my wife
and another poor woman, that laid a pot of ale with me that she would
outrun her. After that I set them as far as Charing Cross, and there
left them and my wife, and I went to see Mrs. Ann, who began very high
about a flock bed I sent her, but I took her down. Here I played at
cards till 9 o’clock. So home and to bed.