80.  We learn, from the memoir prefixed to his “Printed
     Correspondence,” that he fought three duels, disarming and wounding
     his first and second antagonists, and killing the third.  The name
     of the unfortunate gentleman who fell on this occasion was Woolly.
     Lord Chesterfield, absconding, went to Breda, where he obtained the
     royal pardon from Charles II.  He acted a busy part in the eventful
     times in which he lived, and was remarkable for his steady adherence
     to the Stuarts.  Lord Chesterfield’s letter to Charles II., and the
     King’s answer granting the royal pardon, occur in the Correspondence
     published by General Sir John Murray, in 1829.

     “Jan. 17th, 1659.  The Earl of Chesterfield and Dr. Woolly’s son of
     Hammersmith, had a quarrel about a mare of eighteen pounds price;
     the quarrel would not be reconciled, insomuch that a challenge
     passed between them.  They fought a duel on the backside of Mr.
     Colby’s house at Kensington, where the Earl and he had several
     passes.  The Earl wounded him in two places, and would fain have
     then ended, but the stubbornness and pride of heart of Mr. Woolly
     would not give over, and the next pass [he] was killed on the spot.
     The Earl fled to Chelsea, and there took water and escaped.  The
     jury found it chance-medley.”--Rugge’s “Diurnal,” Addit  MSS.,
     British Museum.--B.]

We went forward and came about one of the clock to Mr. Fuller’s, but he
was out of town, so we had a dinner there, and I gave the child 40s.
to give to the two ushers. After that we parted and went homewards, it
being market day at Brainford [Brentford]. I set my wife down and went
with the coach to Mr. Crew’s, thinking to have spoke with Mr. Moore
and Mrs. Jem, he having told me the reason of his melancholy was some
unkindness from her after so great expressions of love, and how he had
spoke to her friends and had their consent, and that he would desire
me to take an occasion of speaking with her, but by no means not to
heighten her discontent or distaste whatever it be, but to make it up if
I can. But he being out of doors, I went away and went to see Mrs. Jem,
who was now very well again, and after a game or two at cards, I left
her. So I went to the Coffee Club, and heard very good discourse; it
was in answer to Mr. Harrington’s answer, who said that the state of the
Roman government was not a settled government, and so it was no wonder
that the balance of propriety [i.e., property] was in one hand, and the
command in another, it being therefore always in a posture of war; but
it was carried by ballot, that it was a steady government, though it is
true by the voices it had been carried before that it was an unsteady
government; so to-morrow it is to be proved by the opponents that the
balance lay in one hand, and the government in another. Thence I went
to Westminster, and met Shaw and Washington, who told me how this day
Sydenham

     [Colonel William Sydenham had been an active officer during the
     Civil Wars, on the Parliament side; M.P. for Dorsetshire, Governor
     of Melcombe, and one of the Committee of Safety.  He was the elder
     brother of the celebrated physician of that name.--B.]

was voted out of the House for sitting any more this Parliament, and
that Salloway was voted out likewise and sent to the Tower, during
the pleasure of the House. Home and wrote by the Post, and carried to
Whitehall, and coming back turned in at Harper-’s, where Jack Price was,
and I drank with him and he told me, among other, things, how much the
Protector

     [Richard Cromwell, third son of Oliver Cromwell, born October 4th,