3d. This morning my Lord showed me the King’s declaration and his letter
to the two Generals to be communicated to the fleet.

     [“King Charles II. his Declaration to all his loving Subjects of the
     Kingdome of England, dated from his Court at Breda in Holland 4/14
     of April, 1660, and read in Parliament with his Majesties Letter of
     the same date to his Excellence the Ld. Gen. Monck to be
     communicated to the Ld. President of the Council of State and
     to the Officers of the Army under his Command.  London, Printed by
     W. Godbid for John Playford in the Temple, 1660.”  40, pp. 8.]

The contents of the letter are his offer of grace to all that will come
in within forty days, only excepting them that the Parliament shall
hereafter except. That the sales of lands during these troubles, and all
other things, shall be left to the Parliament, by which he will stand.
The letter dated at Breda, April, 4 1660, in the 12th year of his reign.
Upon the receipt of it this morning by an express, Mr. Phillips, one
of the messengers of the Council from General Monk, my Lord summoned a
council of war, and in the mean time did dictate to me how he would have
the vote ordered which he would have pass this council. Which done,
the Commanders all came on board, and the council sat in the coach (the
first council of war that had been in my time), where I read the letter
and declaration; and while they were discoursing upon it, I seemed to
draw up a vote, which being offered, they passed. Not one man seemed to
say no to it, though I am confident many in their hearts were against
it. After this was done, I went up to the quarter-deck with my Lord and
the Commanders, and there read both the papers and the vote; which done,
and demanding their opinion, the seamen did all of them cry out, “God
bless King Charles!” with the greatest joy imaginable. That being done,
Sir R. Stayner, who had invited us yesterday, took all the Commanders
and myself on board him to dinner, which not being ready, I went with
Captain Hayward to the Plimouth and Essex, and did what I had to do
there and returned, where very merry at dinner. After dinner, to the
rest of the ships (staid at the Assistance to hear the harper a good
while) quite through the fleet. Which was a very brave sight to visit
all the ships, and to be received with the respect and honour that I was
on board them all; and much more to see the great joy that I brought to
all men; not one through the whole fleet showing the least dislike of
the business. In the evening as I was going on board the Vice-Admiral,
the General began to fire his guns, which he did all that he had in the
ship, and so did all the rest of the Commanders, which was very gallant,
and to hear the bullets go hissing over our heads as we were in the
boat. This done and finished my Proclamation, I returned to the Nazeby,
where my Lord was much pleased to hear how all the fleet took it in a
transport of joy, showed me a private letter of the King’s to him, and
another from the Duke of York in such familiar style as to their common
friend, with all kindness imaginable. And I found by the letters, and
so my Lord told me too, that there had been many letters passed between
them for a great while, and I perceive unknown to Monk. And among the
rest that had carried these letters Sir John Boys is one, and that Mr.
Norwood, which had a ship to carry him over the other day, when my Lord
would not have me put down his name in the book. The King speaks of
his being courted to come to the Hague, but do desire my Lord’s advice
whither to come to take ship. And the Duke offers to learn the seaman’s
trade of him, in such familiar words as if Jack Cole and I had writ
them. This was very strange to me, that my Lord should carry all things
so wisely and prudently as he do, and I was over joyful to see him in so
good condition, and he did not a little please himself to tell me how he
had provided for himself so great a hold on the King.

After this to supper, and then to writing of letters till twelve at
night, and so up again at three in the morning. My Lord seemed to put
great confidence in me, and would take my advice in many things. I
perceive his being willing to do all the honour in the world to Monk,
and to let him have all the honour of doing the business, though he will
many times express his thoughts of him to be but a thick-sculled fool.
So that I do believe there is some agreement more than ordinary between
the King and my Lord to let Monk carry on the business, for it is he
that must do the business, or at least that can hinder it, if he be not
flattered and observed. This, my Lord will hint himself sometimes. My
Lord, I perceive by the King’s letter, had writ to him about his father,
Crew,--[When only seventeen years old, Montagu had married Jemima,
daughter of John Crew, created afterwards Baron Crew of Stene.]--and the
King did speak well of him; but my Lord tells me, that he is afeard that
he hath too much concerned himself with the Presbyterians against the
House of Lords, which will do him a great discourtesy.