11th. Up very early in the morning, and so about a great deal of
business in order to our going hence to-day. Burr going on shore last
night made me very angry. So that I sent for Mr. Pitts to come tome from
the Vice-Admiral’s, intending not to have employed Burr any more. But
Burr by and by coming and desiring humbly that I would forgive him and
Pitts not coming I did set him to work. This morning we began to pull
down all the State’s arms in the fleet, having first sent to Dover
for painters and others to come to set up the King’s. The rest of the
morning writing of letters to London which I afterwards sent by Dunne. I
had this morning my first opportunity of discoursing with Dr. Clarke,

     [Timothy Clarke, M. D., one of the original Fellows of the Royal
     Society.  He was appointed one of the physicians in ordinary to
     Charles II.  on the death of Dr. Quartermaine in 1667.]

whom I found to be a very pretty man and very knowing. He is now going
in this ship to the King. There dined here my Lord Crafford and my Lord
Cavendish, and other Scotchmen whom I afterwards ordered to be received
on board the Plymouth, and to go along with us. After dinner we set
sail from the Downs, I leaving my boy to go to Deal for my linen. In the
afternoon overtook us three or four gentlemen; two of the Berties, and
one Mr. Dormerhoy, a Scotch gentleman, whom I afterwards found to be a
very fine man, who, telling my Lord that they heard the Commissioners
were come out of London to-day, my Lord dropt anchor over against Dover
Castle (which give us about thirty guns in passing), and upon a high
debate with the Vice and Rear Admiral whether it were safe to go and
not stay for the Commissioners, he did resolve to send Sir R. Stayner to
Dover, to enquire of my Lord Winchelsea, whether or no they are come out
of London, and then to resolve to-morrow morning of going or not; which
was done. It blew very hard all this night that I was afeard of my
boy. About 11 at night came the boats from Deal, with great store of
provisions, by the same token John Goods told me that above 20 of the
fowls are smothered, but my boy was put on board the Northwich. To bed.