14th. In the morning when I woke and rose, I saw myself out of the
scuttle close by the shore, which afterwards I was told to be the Dutch
shore; the Hague was clearly to be seen by us. My Lord went up in his
nightgown into the cuddy,

     [“A sort of cabin or cook-room, generally in the fore-part, but
     sometimes near the stern of lighters and barges of burden.”--Smyth’s
     Sailor’s Word-Book.]

to see how to dispose thereof for himself and us that belong to him, to
give order for our removal to-day. Some nasty Dutchmen came on board to
proffer their boats to carry things from us on shore, &c., to get money
by us. Before noon some gentlemen came on board from the shore to kiss
my Lord’s hands. And by and by Mr. North and Dr. Clerke went to kiss the
Queen of Bohemia’s’ hands, from my Lord, with twelve attendants from on
board to wait on them, among which I sent my boy, who, like myself, is
with child to see any strange thing. After noon they came back again
after having kissed the Queen of Bohemia’s hand, and were sent again by
my Lord to do the same to the Prince of Orange.

     [Son of the Prince of Orange and Mary, eldest daughter of Charles I.
     --afterwards William III.  He was then in his tenth year, having
     been born in 1650.]

So I got the Captain to ask leave for me to go, which my Lord did give,
and I taking my boy and judge Advocate with me, went in company with
them. The weather bad; we were sadly washed when we came near the shore,
it being very hard to land there. The shore is, as all the country
between that and the Hague, all sand. The rest of the company got a
coach by themselves; Mr. Creed and I went in the fore part of a coach
wherein were two very pretty ladies, very fashionable and with black
patches, who very merrily sang all the way and that very well, and were
very free to kiss the two blades that were with them. I took out my
flageolette and piped, but in piping I dropped my rapier-stick, but when
I came to the Hague, I sent my boy back again for it and he found it,
for which I did give him 6d., but some horses had gone over it and broke
the scabbard. The Hague is a most neat place in all respects. The houses
so neat in all places and things as is possible. Here we walked up and
down a great while, the town being now very full of Englishmen, for
that the Londoners were come on shore today. But going to see the
Prince,--[Prince of Orange, afterwards William III.]--he was gone forth
with his governor, and so we walked up and down the town and court to
see the place; and by the help of a stranger, an Englishman, we saw
a great many places, and were made to understand many things, as the
intention of may-poles, which we saw there standing at every great man’s
door, of different greatness according to the quality of the person.