21st. In the morning going out I saw many soldiers going towards
Westminster, and was told that they were going to admit the secluded
members again. So I to Westminster Hall, and in Chancery Row I saw about
twenty of them who had been at White Hall with General Monk, who came
thither this morning, and made a speech to them, and recommended to them
a Commonwealth, and against Charles Stuart. They came to the House and
went in one after another, and at last the Speaker came. But it is very
strange that this could be carried so private, that the other members of
the House heard nothing of all this, till they found them in the House,
insomuch that the soldiers that stood there to let in the secluded
members, they took for such as they had ordered to stand there to hinder
their coming in. Mr. Prin came with an old basket-hilt sword on, and had
a great many great shouts upon his going into the Hall. They sat till
noon, and at their coming out Mr. Crew saw me, and bid me come to his
house, which I did, and he would have me dine with him, which I did; and
he very joyful told me that the House had made General Monk, General of
all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland; and that upon Monk’s
desire, for the service that Lawson had lately done in pulling down the
Committee of Safety, he had the command of the Sea for the time being.
He advised me to send for my Lord forthwith, and told me that there is
no question that, if he will, he may now be employed again; and that the
House do intend to do nothing more than to issue writs, and to settle
a foundation for a free Parliament. After dinner I back to Westminster
Hall with him in his coach. Here I met with Mr. Lock and Pursell,
Masters of Music,--[Henry Purcell, father of the celebrated composer,
was gentleman of the Chapel Royal.]--and with them to the Coffee House,
into a room next the water, by ourselves, where we spent an hour or two
till Captain Taylor came to us, who told us, that the House had voted
the gates of the City to be made up again, and the members of the City
that are in prison to be set at liberty; and that Sir G. Booth’s’
case be brought into the House to-morrow. Here we had variety of brave
Italian and Spanish songs, and a canon for eight voices, which Mr. Lock
had lately made on these words: “Domine salvum fac Regem,” an admirable
thing. Here also Capt. Taylor began a discourse of something that he had
lately writ about Gavelkind in answer to one that had wrote a piece
upon the same subject; and indeed discovered a great deal of study
in antiquity in his discourse. Here out of the window it was a most
pleasant sight to see the City from one end to the other with a glory
about it, so high was the light of the bonfires, and so thick round the
City, and the bells rang everywhere. Hence home and wrote to my Lord,
afterwards came down and found Mr. Hunt (troubled at this change) and
Mr. Spong, who staid late with me singing of a song or two, and so
parted. My wife not very well, went to bed before. This morning I met in
the Hall with Mr. Fuller, of Christ’s, and told him of my design to
go to Cambridge, and whither. He told me very freely the temper of Mr.
Widdrington, how he did oppose all the fellows in the College, and that
there was a great distance between him and the rest, at which I was very
sorry, for that he told me he feared it would be little to my brother’s
advantage to be his pupil.