9th. Soon as out of my bed I wrote letters into the country to go by
carrier to-day. Before I was out of my bed, I heard the soldiers very
busy in the morning, getting their horses ready where they lay at
Hilton’s, but I knew not then their meaning in so doing: After I had
wrote my letters I went to Westminster up and down the Hall, and with
Mr. Swan walked a good [deal] talking about Mr. Downing’s business.
I went with him to Mr. Phelps’s house where he had some business to
solicit, where we met Mr. Rogers my neighbour, who did solicit against
him and talked very high, saying that he would not for a L1000 appear in
a business that Swan did, at which Swan was very angry, but I believe
he might be guilty enough. In the Hall I understand how Monk is this
morning gone into London with his army; and met with Mr. Fage, who
told me that he do believe that Monk is gone to secure some of the
Common-council of the City, who were very high yesterday there, and did
vote that they would not pay any taxes till the House was filled up.
I went to my office, where I wrote to my Lord after I had been at the
Upper Bench, where Sir Robert Pye

     [Sir Robert Pye, the elder, was auditor of the Exchequer, and a
     staunch Royalist.  He garrisoned his house at Faringdon, which was
     besieged by his son, of the same names, a decided Republican, son-
     in-law to Hampden, and colonel of horse under Fairfax.  The son,
     here spoken of, was subsequently committed to the Tower for
     presenting a petition to the House of Commons from the county of
     Berks, which he represented in Parliament, complaining of the want
     of a settled form of government.  He had, however, the courage to
     move for an habeas corpus, but judge Newdigate decided that the
     courts of law had not the power to discharge him.  Upon Monk’s
     coming to London, the secluded members passed a vote to liberate
     Pye, and at the Restoration he was appointed equerry to the King.
     He died in 1701.--B.]

this morning came to desire his discharge from the Tower; but it could
not be granted. After that I went to Mrs. Jem, who I had promised to go
along with to her Aunt Wright’s, but she was gone, so I went thither,
and after drinking a glass of sack I went back to Westminster Hall, and
meeting with Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who would needs take me home, where
Mr. Lucy, Burrell, and others dined, and after dinner I went home and
to Westminster Hall, where meeting Swan I went with him by water to the
Temple to our Counsel, and did give him a fee to make a motion to-morrow
in the Exchequer for Mr. Downing. Thence to Westminster Hall, where
I heard an action very finely pleaded between my Lord Dorset and some
other noble persons, his lady and other ladies of quality being here,
and it was about; L330 per annum, that was to be paid to a poor Spittal,
which was given by some of his predecessors; and given on his side.
Thence Swan and I to a drinking-house near Temple Bar, where while he
wrote I played on my flageolet till a dish of poached eggs was got ready
for us, which we eat, and so by coach home. I called at Mr. Harper’s,
who told me how Monk had this day clapt up many of the Common-council,
and that the Parliament had voted that he should pull down their gates
and portcullisses, their posts and their chains, which he do intend to
do, and do lie in the City all night. I went home and got some ahlum
to my mouth, where I have the beginnings of a cancer, and had also a
plaster to my boil underneath my chin.