25th. With my Lord at White Hall, all the morning. I spoke with Mr.
Coventry about my business, who promised me all the assistance I could
expect. Dined with young Mr. Powell, lately come from the Sound, being
amused at our great changes here, and Mr. Southerne, now Clerk to Mr.
Coventry, at the Leg in King-street. Thence to the Admiralty, where I
met with Mr. Turner

     [Thomas Turner (or Tourner) was General Clerk at the Navy Office,
     and on June 30th he offered Pepys L150 to be made joint Clerk of the
     Acts with him.  In a list of the Admiralty officers just before the
     King came in, preserved in the British Museum, there occur, Richard
     Hutchinson; Treasury of the Navy, salary L1500; Thomas Tourner,
     General Clerk, for himself and clerk, L100.]

of the Navy-office, who did look after the place of Clerk of the Acts.
He was very civil to me, and I to him, and shall be so. There came
a letter from my Lady Monk to my Lord about it this evening, but he
refused to come to her, but meeting in White Hall, with Sir Thomas
Clarges, her brother, my Lord returned answer, that he could not desist
in my business; and that he believed that General Monk would take it
ill if my Lord should name the officers in his army; and therefore he
desired to have the naming of one officer in the fleet. With my Lord by
coach to Mr. Crew’s, and very merry by the way, discoursing of the late
changes and his good fortune. Thence home, and then with my wife to
Dorset House, to deliver a list of the names of the justices of the
peace for Huntingdonshire. By coach, taking Mr. Fox part of the way with
me, that was with us with the King on board the Nazeby, who I found
to have married Mrs. Whittle, that lived at Mr. Geer’s so long. A very
civil gentleman. At Dorset House I met with Mr. Kipps, my old friend,
with whom the world is well changed, he being now sealbearer to the Lord
Chancellor, at which my wife and I are well pleased, he being a very
good natured man. Home and late writing letters. Then to my Lord’s
lodging, this being the first night of his coming to Whitehall to lie
since his coming from sea.