6th. This morning some of the Commissioners of Parliament and Sir W.
Batten went to Sir G. Carteret’s office here in town, and paid off the
Chesnut. I carried my wife to White Friars and landed her there, and
myself to Whitehall to the Privy Seal, where abundance of pardons to
seal, but I was much troubled for it because that there are no fees now
coming for them to me. Thence Mr. Moore and I alone to the Leg in King
Street, and dined together on a neat’s tongue and udder. From thence
by coach to Mr. Crew’s to my Lord, who told me of his going out of town
to-morrow to settle the militia in Huntingdonshire, and did desire me to
lay up a box of some rich jewels and things that there are in it, which
I promised to do. After much free discourse with my Lord, who tells me
his mind as to his enlarging his family, &c., and desiring me to look
him out a Master of the Horse and other servants, we parted. From thence
I walked to Greatorex (he was not within), but there I met with Mr.
Jonas Moore,

     [Jonas Moore was born at Whitley, Lancashire, February 8th, 1617,
     and was appointed by Charles I. tutor to the Duke of York.  Soon
     after the Restoration he was knighted and made Surveyor-General of
     the Ordnance.  He was famous as a mathematician, and was one of the
     founders of the Royal Society.  He died August 27th, 1679, and at
     his funeral sixty pieces of ordnance were discharged at the Tower.]

and took him to the Five Bells,’ and drank a glass of wine and left him.
To the Temple, when Sir R. Parkhurst (as was intended the last night)
did seal the writings, and is to have the L2000 told to-morrow. From,
thence by water to Parliament Stairs, and there at an alehouse to Doling
(who is suddenly to go into Ireland to venture his fortune); Simonds
(who is at a great loss for L200 present money, which I was loth to let
him have, though I could now do it, and do love him and think him honest
and sufficient, yet lothness to part with money did dissuade me from
it); Luellin (who was very drowsy from a dose that he had got the last
night), Mr. Mount and several others, among the rest one Mr. Pierce,
an army man, who did make us the best sport for songs and stories in
a Scotch tone (which he do very well) that ever I heard in my life. I
never knew so good a companion in all my observation. From thence to
the bridge by water, it being a most pleasant moonshine night, with
a waterman who did tell such a company of bawdy stories, how once he
carried a lady from Putney in such a night as this, and she bade him lie
down by her, which he did, and did give her content, and a great deal
more roguery. Home and found my girl knocking at the door (it being 11
o’clock at night), her mistress having sent her out for some trivial
business, which did vex me when I came in, and so I took occasion to go
up and to bed in a pet. Before I went forth this morning, one came to
me to give me notice that the justices of Middlesex do meet to-morrow
at Hicks Hall, and that I as one am desired to be there, but I fear I
cannot be there though I much desire it.