2nd. Office. Then dined at home, and by chance Mr. Holliard

     [Thomas Holliard or Hollier was appointed in 1638 surgeon for scald
     heads at St. Thomas’s Hospital, and on January 25th, 1643-4, he was
     chosen surgeon in place of Edward Molins.  In 1670 his son of the
     same names was allowed to take his place during his illness.  Ward,
     in his Diary, p.  235, mentions that the porter at St. Thomas’s
     Hospital told him, in 1661, of Mr. Holyard’s having cut thirty for
     the stone in one year, who all lived.]

called at dinner time and dined with me, with whom I had great discourse
concerning the cure of the King’s evil, which he do deny altogether any
effect at all. In the afternoon I went forth and saw some silver bosses
put upon my new Bible, which cost me 6s. 6d. the making, and 7s. 6d. the
silver, which, with 9s. 6d. the book, comes in all to L1 3s. 6d. From
thence with Mr. Cooke that made them, and Mr. Stephens the silversmith
to the tavern, and did give them a pint of wine. So to White Hall, where
when I came I saw the boats going very thick to Lambeth, and all the
stairs to be full of people. I was told the Queen was a-coming;

     [“Nov. 2.  The Queen-mother and the Princess Henrietta came into
     London, the Queen having left this land nineteen years ago.  Her
     coming was very private, Lambeth-way, where the King, Queen, and the
     Duke of York, and the rest, took water, crossed the Thames, and all
     safely arrived at Whitehall.--“Rugge’s Diurnal.”]

so I got a sculler for sixpence to carry me thither and back again, but
I could not get to see the Queen; so come back, and to my Lord’s, where
he was come; and I supt with him, he being very merry, telling merry
stories of the country mayors, how they entertained the King all the
way as he come along; and how the country gentlewomen did hold up their
heads to be kissed by the King, not taking his hand to kiss as they
should do. I took leave of my Lord and Lady, and so took coach at White
Hall and carried Mr. Childe as far as the Strand, and myself got as far
as Ludgate by all the bonfires, but with a great deal of trouble; and
there the coachman desired that I would release him, for he durst not
go further for the fires. So he would have had a shilling or 6d. for
bringing of me so far; but I had but 3d. about me and did give him it.
In Paul’s church-yard I called at Kirton’s, and there they had got a
mass book for me, which I bought and cost me twelve shillings; and, when
I came home, sat up late and read in it with great pleasure to my wife,
to hear that she was long ago so well acquainted with. So to bed. I
observed this night very few bonfires in the City, not above three in
all London, for the Queen’s coming; whereby I guess that (as I believed
before) her coming do please but very few.