7th S., vii. 26, where are printed two other advertisements of
     Charles’s lost dogs.)]

(which [dirted] the boat, which made us laugh, and me think that a King
and all that belong to him are but just as others are), in a boat by
ourselves, and so got on shore when the King did, who was received by
General Monk with all imaginable love and respect at his entrance
upon the land of Dover. Infinite the crowd of people and the horsemen,
citizens, and noblemen of all sorts. The Mayor of the town came and gave
him his white staff, the badge of his place, which the King did give
him again. The Mayor also presented him from the town a very rich Bible,
which he took and said it was the thing that he loved above all things
in the world. A canopy was provided for him to stand under, which he
did, and talked awhile with General Monk and others, and so into a
stately coach there set for him, and so away through the town towards
Canterbury, without making any stay at Dover. The shouting and joy
expressed by all is past imagination. Seeing that my Lord did not stir
out of his barge, I got into a boat, and so into his barge, whither Mr.
John Crew stepped, and spoke a word or two to my Lord, and so returned,
we back to the ship, and going did see a man almost drowned that fell
out of his boat into the sea, but with much ado was got out. My Lord
almost transported with joy that he had done all this without any the
least blur or obstruction in the world, that could give an offence to
any, and with the great honour he thought it would be to him. Being
overtook by the brigantine, my Lord and we went out of our barge into
it, and so went on board with Sir W. Batten,

     [Clarendon describes William Batten as an obscure fellow, and,
     although unknown to the service, a good seaman, who was in 1642 made
     Surveyor to the Navy; in which employ he evinced great animosity
     against the King.  The following year, while Vice-Admiral to the
     Earl of Warwick, he chased a Dutch man-of-war into Burlington Bay,
     knowing that Queen Henrietta Maria was on board; and then, learning
     that she had landed and was lodged on the quay, he fired above a
     hundred shot upon the house, some of which passing through her
     majesty’s chamber, she was obliged, though indisposed, to retire for
     safety into the open fields.  This act, brutal as it was, found
     favour with the Parliament.  But Batten became afterwards
     discontented; and, when a portion of the fleet revolted, he carried
     the “Constant Warwick,” one of the best ships in the Parliament
     navy, over into Holland, with several seamen of note.  For this act
     of treachery he was knighted and made a Rear-Admiral by Prince
     Charles.  We hear no more of Batten till the Restoration, when he
     became a Commissioner of the Navy, and was soon after M.P. for
     Rochester.  See an account of his second wife, in note to November