5th. To the office. From thence by coach upon the desire of the
principal officers to a Master of Chancery to give Mr. Stowell his oath,
whereby he do answer that he did hear Phineas Pett say very high words
against the King a great while ago. Coming back our coach broke, and so
Stowell and I to Mr. Rawlinson’s, and after a glass of wine parted, and
I to the office, home to dinner, where (having put away my boy in the
morning) his father brought him again, but I did so clear up my boy’s
roguery to his father, that he could not speak against my putting him
away, and so I did give him 10s. for the boy’s clothes that I made
him, and so parted and tore his indenture. All the afternoon with the
principal officers at Sir W. Batten’s about Pett’s business (where I
first saw Col. Slingsby, who has now his appointment for Comptroller),
but did bring it to no issue. This day I saw our Dedimus to be sworn
in the peace by, which will be shortly. In the evening my wife being a
little impatient I went along with her to buy her a necklace of pearl,
which will cost L4 10s., which I am willing to comply with her in for
her encouragement, and because I have lately got money, having now above
L200 in cash beforehand in the world. Home, and having in our way bought
a rabbit and two little lobsters, my wife and I did sup late, and so to
bed. Great news now-a-day of the Duke d’Anjou’s

     [Philip, Duke of Anjou, afterwards Duke of Orleans, brother of Louis
     XIV.  (born 1640, died 1701), married the Princess Henrietta,
     youngest daughter of Charles I., who was born June 16th, 1644, at
     Exeter.  She was known as “La belle Henriette.”  In May, 1670, she
     came to Dover on a political mission from Louis XIV. to her brother
     Charles II., but the visit was undertaken much against the wish of
     her husband.  Her death occurred on her return to France, and
     was attributed to poison.  It was the occasion of one of the finest
     of Bossuet’s “Oraisons Funebres.”]

desire to marry the Princesse Henrietta. Hugh Peters is said to be
taken,

     [Hugh Peters, born at Fowey, Cornwall, and educated at Trinity
     College, Cambridge, where he graduated M.A. 1622.  He was tried as
     one of the regicides, and executed.  A broadside, entitled “The
     Welsh Hubub, or the Unkennelling and earthing of Hugh Peters that
     crafty Fox,” was printed October 3rd, 1660.]

and the Duke of Gloucester is ill, and it is said it will prove the
small-pox.