24th, 1667.]

going to Chappel, it being a thanksgiving-day

     [“A Proclamation for setting apart a day of Solemn and Publick
     Thanksgiving throughout the whole Kingdom,” dated June 5th, 1660.]

for the King’s return. After my Lord was awake, I went up to him to the
Nursery, where he do lie, and, having talked with him a little, I took
leave and carried my wife and Mrs. Pierce to Clothworkers’-Hall, to
dinner, where Mr. Pierce, the Purser, met us. We were invited by Mr.
Chaplin, the Victualler, where Nich. Osborne was. Our entertainment very
good, a brave hall, good company, and very good music. Where among other
things I was pleased that I could find out a man by his voice, whom I
had never seen before, to be one that sang behind the curtaine
formerly at Sir W. Davenant’s opera. Here Dr. Gauden and Mr. Gauden the
victualler dined with us. After dinner to Mr. Rawlinson’s,

     [Daniel Rawlinson kept the Mitre in Fenchurch Street, and there is a
     farthing token of his extant, “At the Mitetr in Fenchurch Streete,
     D. M. R.”  The initials stand for Daniel and Margaret Rawlinson (see
     “Boyne’s Trade Tokens,” ed.  Williamson, vol. i., 1889, p. 595) In
     “Reliquiae Hearnianae” (ed.  Bliss, 1869, vol. ii.  p. 39) is the
     following extract from Thomas Rawlinson’s Note Book R.: “Of Daniel
     Rawlinson, my grandfather, who kept the Mitre tavern in Fenchurch
     Street, and of whose being sequestred in the Rump time I have heard
     much, the Whiggs tell this, that upon the king’s murder he hung his
     signe in mourning.  He certainly judged right.  The honour of the
     Mitre was much eclipsed through the loss of so good a parent of the
     church of England.  These rogues say, this endeared him so much to
     the churchmen that he soon throve amain and got a good estate.”
      Mrs. Rawlinson died of the plague (see August 9th, 1666), and the
     house was burnt in the Great Fire.  Mr. Rawlinson rebuilt the Mitre,
     and he had the panels of the great room painted with allegorical
     figures by Isaac Fuller.  Daniel was father of Sir Thomas Rawlinson,
     of whom Thomas Hearne writes (October 1st, 1705): “Sir Thomas
     Rawlinson is chosen Lord Mayor of London for ye ensueing
     notwithstanding the great opposition of ye Whigg party” (Hearne’s
     “Collections,” ed. Doble, 1885, vol. i.  p. 51).  The well-known
     antiquaries, Thomas and Richard Rawlinson, sons of Sir Thomas, were
     therefore grandsons of Daniel.]

to see him and his wife, and would have gone to my Aunt Wight, but that
her only child, a daughter, died last night. Home and to my Lord, who
supped within, and Mr. E. Montagu, Mr. Thos. Crew, and others with him
sat up late. I home and to bed.