21st. This day dined Sir John Boys

     [Of Bonnington and Sandwich, Gentleman of the Privy-Chamber to
     Charles I.  He defended Donnington Castle, Berkshire, for the King
     against Jeremiah Horton, 1644, and received an augmentation to his
     arms in consequence.]

and some other gentlemen formerly great Cavaliers, and among the rest
one Mr. Norwood, for whom my Lord give a convoy to carry him to the
Brill,--[Brielle, or Den Briel, a seaport town in the province of South
Holland.]--but he is certainly going to the King. For my Lord commanded
me that I should not enter his name in my book. My Lord do show them and
that sort of people great civility. All their discourse and others are
of the King’s coming, and we begin to speak of it very freely. And heard
how in many churches in London, and upon many signs there, and upon
merchants’ ships in the river, they had set up the King’s arms. In the
afternoon the Captain would by all means have me up to his cabin, and
there treated me huge nobly, giving me a barrel of pickled oysters,
and opened another for me, and a bottle of wine, which was a very great
favour. At night late singing with W. Howe, and under the barber’s hands
in the coach. This night there came one with a letter from Mr. Edw.
Montagu to my Lord, with command to deliver it to his own hands. I do
believe that he do carry some close business on for the King.

     [Pepys’s guess at E. Montagu’s business is confirmed by Clarendon’s
     account of his employment of him to negotiate with Lord Sandwich on
     behalf of the King.  (“History of the Rebellion,” book xvi.)--Notes
     and Queries, vol. x.  p. 3--M. B.]

This day I had a large letter from Mr. Moore, giving me an account of
the present dispute at London that is like to be at the beginning of
the Parliament, about the House of Lords, who do resolve to sit with the
Commons, as not thinking themselves dissolved yet. Which, whether it
be granted or no, or whether they will sit or no, it will bring a great
many inconveniences. His letter I keep, it being a very well writ one.