19th. Up early, hearing nothing of the child, and went to Scheveling,
where I found no getting on board, though the Duke of York sent every
day to see whether he could do it or no. Here I met with Mr. Pinkney and
his sons, and with them went back to the Hague, in our way lighting and
going to see a woman that makes pretty rock-work in shells, &c., which
could I have carried safe I would have bought some of. At the Hague
we went to buy some pictures, where I saw a sort of painting done upon
woollen cloth, drawn as if there was a curtain over it, which was very
pleasant, but dear. Another pretty piece of painting I saw, on which
there was a great wager laid by young Pinkney and me whether it was a
principal or a copy. But not knowing how to decide, it was broken off,
and I got the old man to lay out as much as my piece of gold come to,
and so saved my money, which had been 24s. lost, I fear. While we were
here buying of pictures, we saw Mr. Edward and his company land. Who
told me that they had been at Leyden all night, at which I was very
angry with Mr. Pierce, and shall not be friends I believe a good while.
To our lodging to dinner. After that out to buy some linen to wear
against to-morrow, and so to the barber’s. After that by waggon to
Lausdune, where the 365 children were born. We saw the hill where they
say the house stood and sunk wherein the children were born. The basins
wherein the male and female children were baptized do stand over a large
table that hangs upon a wall, with the whole story of the thing in Dutch
and Latin, beginning, “Margarita Herman Comitissa,” &c. The thing was
done about 200 years ago.

The town is a little small village which answers much to one of our
small villages, such a one as Chesterton in all respects, and one could
have thought it in England but for the language of the people. We went
into a little drinking house where there were a great many Dutch boors
eating of fish in a boorish manner, but very merry in their way. But
the houses here as neat as in the great places. From thence to the Hague
again playing at crambo--[Crambo is described as “a play at short verses
in which a word is given, and the parties contend who can find most
rhymes to it.”]--in the waggon, Mr. Edward, Mr. Ibbott, W. Howe, Mr.
Pinkney, and I. When we were come thither W. Howe, and Mr. Ibbott, and
Mr. Pinckney went away for Scheveling, while I and the child to walk up
and down the town, where I met my old chamber-fellow, Mr. Ch. Anderson,
and a friend of his (both Physicians), Mr. Wright, who took me to a
Dutch house, where there was an exceeding pretty lass, and right for the
sport, but it being Saturday we could not have much of her company,
but however I staid with them (having left the child with my uncle
Pickering, whom I met in the street) till 12 at night. By that time
Charles was almost drunk, and then broke up, he resolving to go thither
again, after he had seen me at my lodging, and lie with the girl, which
he told me he had done in the morning. Going to my lodging we met with
the bellman, who struck upon a clapper, which I took in my hand, and it
is just like the clapper that our boys frighten the birds away from the
corn with in summer time in England. To bed.