16s. for our part of the club. At dinner in came Dr. Cade, a merry mad
parson of the King’s. And they two after dinner got the child and me
(the others not being able to crowd in) to see the King, who kissed the
child very affectionately. Then we kissed his, and the Duke of York’s,
and the Princess Royal’s hands. The King seems to be a very sober man;
and a very splendid Court he hath in the number of persons of quality
that are about him, English very rich in habit. From the King to the
Lord Chancellor,

     [On January 29th, 1658, Charles II.  entrusted the Great Seal to Sir
     Edward Hyde, with the title of Lord Chancellor, and in that
     character Sir Edward accompanied the King to England.]

who did lie bed-rid of the gout: he spoke very merrily to the child
and me. After that, going to see the Queen of Bohemia, I met with Dr.
Fullers whom I sent to a tavern with Mr. Edw. Pickering, while I and
the rest went to see the Queen,--[Henrietta Maria.]--who used us very
respectfully; her hand we all kissed. She seems a very debonaire, but
plain lady. After that to the Dr.’s, where we drank a while or so. In a
coach of a friend’s of Dr. Cade we went to see a house of the Princess
Dowager’s in a park about half-a-mile or a mile from the Hague, where
there is one, the most beautiful room for pictures in the whole world.
She had here one picture upon the top, with these words, dedicating it
to the memory of her husband:--“Incomparabili marito, inconsolabilis
vidua.”

     [Mary, Princess Royal, eldest daughter of Charles I., and widow of
     William of Nassau, Prince of Orange.  She was not supposed to be
     inconsolable, and scandal followed her at the court of Charles II.,
     where she died of small-pox, December 24th, 1660.]

Here I met with Mr. Woodcock of Cambridge, Mr. Hardy and another, and
Mr. Woodcock beginning we had two or three fine songs, he and I, and
W. Howe to the Echo, which was very pleasant, and the more because in a
heaven of pleasure and in a strange country, that I never was taken up
more with a sense of pleasure in my life. After that we parted and back
to the Hague and took a tour or two about the Forehault,--[The Voorhout
is the principal street of the Hague, and it is lined with handsome
trees.]--where the ladies in the evening do as our ladies do in Hide
Park. But for my life I could not find one handsome, but their coaches
very rich and themselves so too. From thence, taking leave of the
Doctor, we took wagon to Scheveling, where we had a fray with the
Boatswain of the Richmond, who would not freely carry us on board, but
at last he was willing to it, but then it was so late we durst not go.
So we returned between 10 and 11 at night in the dark with a wagon with
one horse to the Hague, where being come we went to bed as well as we
could be accommodated, and so to sleep.