26th. Early to White Hall, thinking to have a meeting of my Lord and the
principal officers, but my Lord could not, it being the day that he
was to go and be admitted in the House of Lords, his patent being done,
which he presented upon his knees to the Speaker; and so it was read in
the House, and he took his place. I at the Privy Seal Office with Mr.
Hooker, who brought me acquainted with Mr. Crofts of the Signet, and
I invited them to a dish of meat at the Leg in King Street, and so we
dined there and I paid for all and had very good light given me as to my
employment there. Afterwards to Mr. Pierces, where I should have dined
but I could not, but found Mr. Sheply and W. Howe there. After we had
drunk hard we parted, and I went away and met Dr. Castle, who is one of
the Clerks of the Privy Seal, and told him how things were with my Lord
and me, which he received very gladly. I was this day told how Baron
against all expectation and law has got the place of Bickerstaffe, and
so I question whether he will not lay claim to wait the next month, but
my Lord tells me that he will stand for it. In the evening I met with T.
Doling, who carried me to St. James’s Fair,

     [August, 1661: “This year the Fair, called St. James’s Fair, was
     kept the full appointed time, being a fortnight; but during that
     time many lewd and infamous persons were by his Majesty’s express
     command to the Lord Chamberlain, and his Lordship’s direction to
     Robert Nelson, Esq., committed to the House of Correction.”--Rugge’s
     Diurnal.  St; James’s fair was held first in the open space near St.
     James’s Palace, and afterwards in St. James’s Market.  It was
     prohibited by the Parliament in 1651, but revived at the
     Restoration.  It was, however, finally suppressed before the close
     of the reign of Charles II.]

and there meeting with W. Symons and his wife, and Luellin, and D.
Scobell’s wife and cousin, we went to Wood’s at the Pell Mell

     [This is one of the earliest references to Pall Mall as an inhabited
     street, and also one of the earliest uses of the word clubbing.]

(our old house for clubbing), and there we spent till 10 at night, at
which time I sent to my Lord’s for my clerk Will to come to me, and so
by link home to bed. Where I found Commissioner Willoughby had sent
for all his things away out of my bedchamber, which is a little
disappointment, but it is better than pay too dear for them.