4th. In the morning at my lute an hour, and so to my office, where I
staid expecting to have Mr. Squib come to me, but he did not. At noon
walking in the Hall I found Mr. Swan and got him and Captain Stone
together, and there advised about Mr. Downing’s business. So to Will’s,
and sat there till three o’clock and then to Mr. Swan’s, where I found
his wife in very genteel mourning for her father, and took him out by
water to the Counsellor at the Temple, Mr. Stephens, and from thence to
Gray’s Inn, thinking to speak with Sotherton Ellis, but found him not,
so we met with an acquaintance of his in the walks, and went and drank,
where I ate some bread and butter, having ate nothing all day, while
they were by chance discoursing of Marriot, the great eater, so that I
was, I remember, ashamed to eat what I would have done. Here Swan shewed
us a ballad to the tune of Mardike which was most incomparably wrote in
a printed hand, which I borrowed of him, but the song proved but silly,
and so I did not write it out. Thence we went and leaving Swan at his
master’s, my Lord Widdrington, I met with Spicer, Washington, and D.
Vines in Lincoln’s Inn Court, and they were buying of a hanging jack to
roast birds on of a fellow that was there selling of some. I was fain to
slip from there and went to Mrs. Crew’s to her and advised about a maid
to come and be with Mrs. Jem while her maid is sick, but she could spare
none. Thence to Sir Harry Wright’s, but my lady not being within I spoke
to Mrs. Carter about it, who will get one against Monday. So with a link
boy

     [Links were torches of tow or pitch to light the way.  Ed.]

to Scott’s, where Mrs. Ann was in a heat, but I spoke not to her,
but told Mrs. Jem what I had done, and after that went home and wrote
letters into the country by the post, and then played awhile on my lute,
and so done, to supper and then to bed. All the news to-day is, that
the Parliament this morning voted the House to be made up four hundred
forthwith. This day my wife killed her turkeys that Mr. Sheply gave her,
that came out of Zealand with my Lord, and could not get her m’d Jane by
no means at any time to kill anything.