2nd. In the morning at a breakfast of radishes at the Purser’s cabin.
After that to writing till dinner. At which time comes Dunne from
London, with letters that tell us the welcome news of the Parliament’s
votes yesterday, which will be remembered for the happiest May-day that
bath been many a year to England. The King’s letter was read in the
House, wherein he submits himself and all things to them, as to an Act
of Oblivion to all,

     [“His Majesty added thereunto an excellent Declaration for the
     safety and repose of those, who tortured in their consciences, for
     having partaken in the rebellion, might fear the punishment of it,
     and in that fear might oppose the tranquillity of the Estate, and
     the calling in of their lawful Prince.  It is printed and published
     as well as the letter, but that shall not hinder me to say, that
     there was never seen a more perfect assemblage of all the most
     excellent natural qualities, and of all the venues, as well Royal as
     Christian, wherewith a great Prince may be endowed, than was found
     in those two wonderful productions.”--Sir William Lowers ‘Relation
 ... of the voiage and Residence Which...  Charles the II.
     Hath made in Holland,’ Hague, 1660, folio, p. 3.]

unless they shall please to except any, as to the confirming of the
sales of the King’s and Church lands, if they see good. The House upon
reading the letter, ordered L50,000 to be forthwith provided to send to
His Majesty for his present supply; and a committee chosen to return an
answer of thanks to His Majesty for his gracious letter; and that the
letter be kept among the records of the Parliament; and in all this not
so much as one No. So that Luke Robinson himself stood up and made a
recantation for what he had done, and promises to be a loyal subject
to his Prince for the time to come. The City of London have put a
Declaration, wherein they do disclaim their owing any other government
but that of a King, Lords, and Commons. Thanks was given by the House to
Sir John Greenville,

     [Created Earl of Bath, 1661; son of Sir Bevil Grenville, killed at
     the battle of Lansdowne; he was, when a boy, left for dead on the
     field at the second battle of Newbury, and said to have been the
     only person entrusted by Charles II. and Monk in bringing about the
     Restoration.]

one of the bedchamber to the King, who brought the letter, and they
continued bare all the time it was reading. Upon notice made from the
Lords to the Commons, of their desire that the Commons would join with
them in their vote for King, Lords, and Commons; the Commons did concur
and voted that all books whatever that are out against the Government of
King, Lords, and Commons, should be brought into the House and burned.
Great joy all yesterday at London, and at night more bonfires than ever,
and ringing of bells, and drinking of the King’s health upon their knees
in the streets, which methinks is a little too much. But every
body seems to be very joyfull in the business, insomuch that our
sea-commanders now begin to say so too, which a week ago they would not
do.

     [“The picture of King Charles II. was often set up in houses,
     without the least molestation, whereas a while ago, it was almost a
     hanging matter so to do; but now the Rump Parliament was so hated
     and jeered at, that the butchers’ boys would say, ‘Will you buy any
     Parliament rumps and kidneys?’  And it was a very ordinary thing to
     see little children make a fire in the streets, and burn rumps.”
      --Rugge’s Diurnal.--B.]

And our seamen, as many as had money or credit for drink, did do nothing
else this evening. This day came Mr. North (Sir Dudley North’s son) on
board, to spend a little time here, which my Lord was a little troubled
at, but he seems to be a fine gentleman, and at night did play his part
exceeding well at first sight. After musique I went up to the Captain’s
Cabin with him and Lieutenant Ferrers, who came hither to-day from
London to bring this news to my Lord, and after a bottle of wine we all
to bed.