15th. To Westminster, and it being very cold upon the water I went all
alone to the Sun and drank a draft of mulled white wine, and so to Mr.
de Cretz, whither I sent for J. Spicer (to appoint him to expect me this
afternoon at the office, with the other L1000 from Whitehall), and
here we staid and did see him give some finishing touches to my Lord’s
picture, so at last it is complete to my mind, and I leave mine with him
to copy out another for himself, and took the original by a porter with
me to my Lord’s, where I found my Lord within, and staid hearing him and
Mr. Child playing upon my Lord’s new organ, the first time I ever heard
it. My Lord did this day show me the King’s picture, which was done in
Flanders, that the King did promise my Lord before he ever saw him, and
that we did expect to have had at sea before the King came to us; but
it came but to-day, and indeed it is the most pleasant and the most like
him that ever I saw picture in my life. As dinner was coming on table,
my wife came to my Lord’s, and I got her carried in to my Lady, who took
physic to-day, and was just now hiring of a French maid that was with
her, and they could not understand one another till my wife came to
interpret. Here I did leave my wife to dine with my Lord, the first time
he ever did take notice of her as my wife, and did seem to have a just
esteem for her. And did myself walk homewards (hearing that Sir W. Pen
was gone before in a coach) to overtake him and with much ado at last
did in Fleet Street, and there I went in to him, and there was Sir
Arnold Brames, and we all three to Sir W. Batten’s to dinner, he having
a couple of Servants married to-day; and so there was a great number of
merchants, and others of good quality on purpose after dinner to make
an offering, which, when dinner was done, we did, and I did give ten
shillings and no more, though I believe most of the rest did give more,
and did believe that I did so too. From thence to Whitehall again by
water to Mr. Fox and by two porters carried away the other L1000. He was
not within himself, but I had it of his kinsman, and did give him L4.
and other servants something; but whereas I did intend to have given Mr.
Fox himself a piece of plate of L50 I was demanded L100, for the fee of
the office at 6d. a pound, at which I was surprised, but, however, I
did leave it there till I speak with my Lord. So I carried it to the
Exchequer, where at Will’s I found Mr. Spicer, and so lodged it at his
office with the rest. From thence after a pot of ale at Will’s I took
boat in the dark and went for all that to the old Swan, and so to Sir
Wm. Batten’s, and leaving some of the gallants at cards I went home,
where I found my wife much satisfied with my Lord’s discourse and
respect to her, and so after prayers to bed.