13th (Lord’s day). Trimmed in the morning, after that to the cook’s room
with Mr. Sheply, the first time that I was there this voyage. Then to
the quarter-deck, upon which the tailors and painters were at work,
cutting out some pieces of yellow cloth into the fashion of a crown and
C. R. and put it upon a fine sheet, and that into the flag instead of
the State’s arms, which after dinner was finished and set up after
it had been shewn to my Lord, who took physic to-day and was in his
chamber, and liked it so well as to bid me give the tailors 20s. among
them for doing of it. This morn Sir J. Boys and Capt. Isham met us in
the Nonsuch, the first of whom, after a word or two with my Lord, went
forward, the other staid. I heard by them how Mr. Downing had never
made any address to the King, and for that was hated exceedingly by the
Court, and that he was in a Dutch ship which sailed by us, then going
to England with disgrace. Also how Mr. Morland was knighted by the King
this week, and that the King did give the reason of it openly, that
it was for his giving him intelligence all the time he was clerk to
Secretary Thurloe. In the afternoon a council of war, only to acquaint
them that the Harp must be taken out of all their flags,

     [In May, 1658, the old Union Jack (being the crosses of St. George
     and St. Andrew combined) was revived, with the Irish harp over the
     centre of the flag.  This harp was taken off at the Restoration.
     (See “The National Flags of the Commonwealth,” by H. W. Henfrey,”
      Journ. Brit.  Arch.  Assoc.,” vol.  xxxi, p. 54.) The sign of the
     “Commonwealth Arms” was an uncommon one, but a token of one exists--
     “Francis Wood at ye Commonwealth arms in Mary Maudlens” [St. Mary
     Magdalen, Old Fish Street].]

it being very offensive to the King. Mr. Cook, who came after us in the
Yarmouth, bringing me a letter from my wife and a Latin letter from my
brother John, with both of which I was exceedingly pleased. No sermon
all day, we being under sail, only at night prayers, wherein Mr. Ibbott
prayed for all that were related to us in a spiritual and fleshly way.
We came within sight of Middle’s shore. Late at night we writ letters
to the King of the news of our coming, and Mr. Edward Picketing carried
them. Capt. Isham went on shore, nobody showing of him any respect; so
the old man very fairly took leave of my Lord, and my Lord very coldly
bid him “God be with you,” which was very strange, but that I hear that
he keeps a great deal of prating and talking on shore, on board, at the
King’s Courts, what command he had with my Lord, &c. After letters were
gone then to bed.