2d. Drank at Harper’s with Doling, and so to my office, where I found
all the officers of the regiments in town, waiting to receive money that
their soldiers might go out of town, and what was in the Exchequer they
had. At noon after dining at home I called at Harper’s for Doling, and
he and I met with Luellin and drank with him at the Exchequer at Charing
Cross, and thence he and I went to the Temple to Mr. Calthrop’s chamber,
and from thence had his man by water to London Bridge to Mr. Calthrop,
a grocer, and received L60 for my Lord. In our way we talked with our
waterman, White, who told us how the watermen had lately been abused by
some that had a desire to get in to be watermen to the State, and had
lately presented an address of nine or ten thousand hands to stand by
this Parliament, when it was only told them that it was to a petition
against hackney coaches; and that to-day they had put out another to
undeceive the world and to clear themselves, and that among the rest
Cropp, my waterman and one of great practice, was one that did cheat
them thus. After I had received the money we went to the Bridge Tavern
and drank a quart of wine and so back by water, landing Mr. Calthrop’s
man at the Temple and we went homewards, but over against Somerset
House, hearing the noise of guns, we landed and found the Strand full
of soldiers. So I took my money and went to Mrs. Johnson, my Lord’s
sempstress, and giving her my money to lay up, Doling and I went up
stairs to a window, and looked out and see the foot face the horse and
beat them back, and stood bawling and calling in the street for a free
Parliament and money. By and by a drum was heard to beat a march coming
towards them, and they got all ready again and faced them, and they
proved to be of the same mind with them; and so they made a great deal
of joy to see one another. After all this, I took my money, and went
home on foot and laying up my money, and changing my stockings and
shoes, I this day having left off my great skirt suit, and put on my
white suit with silver lace coat, and went over to Harper’s, where I met
with W. Simons, Doling, Luellin and three merchants, one of which had
occasion to use a porter, so they sent for one, and James the soldier
came, who told us how they had been all day and night upon their guard
at St. James’s, and that through the whole town they did resolve to
stand to what they had began, and that to-morrow he did believe they
would go into the City, and be received there. After all this we went to
a sport called, selling of a horse for a dish of eggs and herrings, and
sat talking there till almost twelve o’clock and then parted, they were
to go as far as Aldgate. Home and to bed.