18th. Very early up, and, hearing that the Duke of York, our Lord High
Admiral, would go on board to-day, Mr. Pickering and I took waggon for
Scheveling, leaving the child in Mr. Pierces hands, with directions to
keep him within doors all day till he heard from me. But the wind being
very high that no boats could get off from shore, we returned to
the Hague (having breakfasted with a gentleman of the Duke’s, and
Commissioner Pett, sent on purpose to give notice to my Lord of his
coming), where I hear that the child is gone to Delfe to see the town.
So we all and Mr. Ibbott, the Minister, took a schuit--[The trekschuit
(drag-boat) along the canal is still described as an agreeable
conveyance from Leyden to Delft.]--and very much pleased with the manner
and conversation of the passengers, where most speak French; went after
them, but met them by the way. But however we went forward making no
stop. Where when we were come we got a smith’s boy of the town to go
along with us, but could speak nothing but Dutch, and he showed us the
church where Van Trump lies entombed with a very fine monument. His
epitaph concluded thus:--“Tandem Bello Anglico tantum non victor, certe
invictus, vivere et vincere desiit.” There is a sea-fight cut in marble,
with the smoke, the best expressed that ever I saw in my life. From
thence to the great church, that stands in a fine great market-place,
over against the Stadt-house, and there I saw a stately tomb of the
old Prince of Orange, of marble and brass; wherein among other rarities
there are the angels with their trumpets expressed as it were crying.
Here were very fine organs in both the churches. It is a most sweet
town, with bridges, and a river in every street. Observing that in every
house of entertainment there hangs in every room a poor-man’s box, and
desiring to know the reason thereof, it was told me that it is their
custom to confirm all bargains by putting something into the poor
people’s box, and that binds as fast as any thing. We also saw the
Guesthouse, where it was very pleasant to see what neat preparation
there is for the poor. We saw one poor man a-dying there. After we had
seen all, we light by chance of an English house to drink in, where we
were very merry, discoursing of the town and the thing that hangs up in
the Stadthouse like a bushel, which I was told is a sort of punishment
for some sort of offenders to carry through the streets of the town over
his head, which is a great weight. Back by water, where a pretty sober
Dutch lass sat reading all the way, and I could not fasten any discourse
upon her. At our landing we met with Commissioner Pett going down to the
water-side with Major Harly, who is going upon a dispatch into England.
They having a coach I left the Parson and my boy and went along with
Commissioner Pett, Mr. Ackworth and Mr. Dawes his friends, to the
Princess Dowager’s house again. Thither also my Lord Fairfax and some
other English Lords did come to see it, and my pleasure was increased by
seeing of it again. Besides we went into the garden, wherein are gallant
nuts better than ever I saw, and a fine Echo under the house in a vault
made on purpose with pillars, where I played on my flageolette to great
advantage. Back to the Hague, where not finding Mr. Edward, I was much
troubled, but went with the Parson to supper to Commissioner Pett,
where we sat late. And among other mirth Mr. Ackworth vyed wives, each
endeavouring to set his own wife out to the best advantage, he having as
they said an extraordinary handsome wife. But Mr. Dawes could not be got
to say anything of his. After that to our lodging where W. Howe and I
exceeding troubled not to know what is become of our young gentleman. So
to bed.