29th. The King’s birthday. Busy all the morning writing letters to
London, among the rest one to Mr. Chetwind to give me an account of
the fees due to the Herald for the Order of the Garter, which my Lord
desires to know. After dinner got all ready and sent away Mr. Cook to
London with a letter and token to my wife. After that abroad to shore
with my Lord (which he offered me of himself, saying that I had a great
deal of work to do this month, which was very true). On shore we took
horses, my Lord and Mr. Edward, Mr. Hetly and I, and three or four
servants, and had a great deal of pleasure in riding. Among other things
my Lord showed me a house that cost a great deal of money, and is built
in so barren and inconvenient a place that my Lord calls it the fool’s
house. At last we came upon a very high cliff by the sea-side, and rode
under it, we having laid great wagers, I and Dr. Mathews, that it was
not so high as Paul’s; my Lord and Mr. Hetly, that it was. But we riding
under it, my Lord made a pretty good measure of it with two sticks, and
found it to be not above thirty-five yards high, and Paul’s is reckoned
to be about ninety. From thence toward the barge again, and in our way
found the people at Deal going to make a bonfire for joy of the day, it
being the King’s birthday, and had some guns which they did fire at my
Lord’s coming by. For which I did give twenty shillings among them to
drink. While we were on the top of the cliffe, we saw and heard our guns
in the fleet go off for the same joy. And it being a pretty fair day we
could see above twenty miles into France. Being returned on board, my
Lord called for Mr. Sheply’s book of Paul’s, by which we were confirmed
in our wager. After that to supper and then to musique, and so to
bed. The pain that I have got last night by cold is not yet gone, but
troubles me at the time of.... This day, it is thought, the King do
enter the city of London.

     [“Divers maidens, in behalf of themselves and others, presented a
     petition to the Lord Mayor of London, wherein they pray his Lordship
     to grant them leave and liberty to meet His Majesty on the day of
     his passing through the city; and if their petition be granted, that
     they will all be clad in white waistcoats and crimson petticoats,
     and other ornaments of triumph and rejoicing.”--Rugge’s Diurnal, May,