9th (Lord’s day). Being called up early by Sir W. Batten I rose and went
to his house and he told me the ill news that he had this morning from
Woolwich, that the Assurance (formerly Captain Holland’s ship, and now
Captain Stoakes’s, designed for Guiny and manned and victualled), was by
a gust of wind sunk down to the bottom. Twenty men drowned. Sir Williams
both went by barge thither to see how things are, and I am sent to the
Duke of York to tell him, and by boat with some other company going to
Whitehall from the Old Swan. I went to the Duke. And first calling upon
Mr. Coventry at his chamber, I went to the Duke’s bed-side, who had sat
up late last night, and lay long this morning, who was much surprised,
therewith. This being done I went to chappell, and sat in Mr. Blagrave’s
pew, and there did sing my part along with another before the King, and
with much ease. From thence going to my Lady I met with a letter from
my Lord (which Andrew had been at my house to bring me and missed me),
commanding me to go to Mr. Denham, to get a man to go to him to-morrow
to Hinchinbroke, to contrive with him about some alterations in his
house, which I did and got Mr. Kennard. Dined with my Lady and staid all
the afternoon with her, and had infinite of talk of all kind of things,
especially of beauty of men and women, with which she seems to be much
pleased to talk of. From thence at night to Mr. Kennard and took him to
Mr. Denham, the Surveyor’s. Where, while we could not speak with him,
his chief man (Mr. Cooper) did give us a cup of good sack. From thence
with Mr. Kennard to my Lady who is much pleased with him, and after a
glass of sack there; we parted, having taken order for a horse or two
for him and his servant to be gone to-morrow. So to my father’s, where
I sat while they were at supper, and I found my mother below, stairs
and pretty well. Thence home, where I hear that the Comptroller had some
business with me, and (with Giffin’s lanthorn) I went to him and there
staid in discourse an hour ‘till late, and among other things he showed
me a design of his, by the King’s making an Order of Knights of the Seal
to give an encouragement for persons of honour to undertake the service
of the sea, and he had done it with great pains and very ingeniously. So
home and to prayers and to bed.