27th. This morning Burr was absent again from on board, which I was
troubled at, and spoke to Mr. Pierce, Purser, to speak to him of it, and
it is my mind. This morning Pim [the tailor] spent in my cabin, putting
a great many ribbons to a suit. After dinner in the afternoon came on
board Sir Thomas Hatton and Sir R. Maleverer going for Flushing; but all
the world know that they go where the rest of the many gentlemen go that
every day flock to the King at Breda.

     [The King arrived at Breda on the 14th April.  Sir W. Lower writes
     (“Voiage and Residence of Charles II. in Holland,” p. 5): “Many
     considerations obliged him to depart the territories under the
     obedience of the King of Spain in this conjuncture of affairs.”]

They supped here, and my Lord treated them as he do the rest that go
thither, with a great deal of civility. While we were at supper a packet
came, wherein much news from several friends. The chief is that, that I
had from Mr. Moore, viz. that he fears the Cavaliers in the House will
be so high, that the others will be forced to leave the House and fall
in with General Monk, and so offer things to the King so high on the
Presbyterian account that he may refuse, and so they will endeavour some
more mischief; but when I told my Lord it, he shook his head and told
me, that the Presbyterians are deceived, for the General is certainly
for the King’s interest, and so they will not be able to prevail that
way with him. After supper the two knights went on board the Grantham,
that is to convey them to Flushing. I am informed that the Exchequer
is now so low, that there is not L20 there, to give the messenger that
brought the news of Lambert’s being taken; which story is very strange
that he should lose his reputation of being a man of courage now at
one blow, for that he was not able to fight one stroke, but desired of
Colonel Ingoldsby several times for God’s sake to let him escape. Late
reading my letters, my mind being much troubled to think that, after
all our hopes, we should have any cause to fear any more disappointments
therein. To bed. This day I made even with Mr. Creed, by sending him my
bill and he me my money by Burr whom I sent for it.