11th. This morning I lay long abed, and then to my office, where I read
all the morning my Spanish book of Rome. At noon I walked in the Hall,
where I heard the news of a letter from Monk, who was now gone into the
City again, and did resolve to stand for the sudden filling up of the
House, and it was very strange how the countenance of men in the Hall
was all changed with joy in half an hour’s time. So I went up to the
lobby, where I saw the Speaker reading of the letter; and after it was
read, Sir A. Haselrigge came out very angry, and Billing--[The quaker
mentioned before on the 7th of this month.]--standing at the door,
took him by the arm, and cried, “Thou man, will thy beast carry thee no
longer? thou must fall!” The House presently after rose, and appointed
to meet again at three o’clock. I went then down into the Hall, where I
met with Mr. Chetwind, who had not dined no more than myself, and so we
went toward London, in our way calling at two or three shops, but could
have no dinner. At last, within Temple Bar, we found a pullet ready
roasted, and there we dined. After that he went to his office in
Chancery Lane, calling at the Rolls, where I saw the lawyers pleading.
Then to his office, where I sat in his study singing, while he was with
his man (Mr. Powell’s son) looking after his business. Thence we took
coach for the City to Guildhall, where the Hall was full of people
expecting Monk and Lord Mayor to come thither, and all very joyfull.
Here we stayed a great while, and at last meeting with a friend of
his we went to the 3 Tun tavern and drank half a pint of wine, and not
liking the wine we went to an alehouse, where we met with company of
this third man’s acquaintance, and there we drank a little. Hence I went
alone to Guildhall to see whether Monk was come again or no, and met
with him coming out of the chamber where he had been with the Mayor and
Aldermen, but such a shout I never heard in all my life, crying out,
“God bless your Excellence.” Here I met with Mr. Lock, and took him to
an alehouse, and left him there to fetch Chetwind; when we were come
together, Lock told us the substance of the letter that went from Monk
to the Parliament; wherein, after complaints that he and his officers
were put upon such offices against the City as they could not do with
any content or honour, that there are many members now in the House that
were of the late tyrannical Committee of Safety. That Lambert and Vane
are now in town, contrary to the vote of Parliament. That there were
many in the House that do press for new oaths to be put upon men;
whereas we have more cause to be sorry for the many oaths that we have
already taken and broken. That the late petition of the fanatique people
presented by Barebone, for the imposing of an oath upon all sorts of
people, was received by the House with thanks. That therefore he [Monk]
do desire that all writs for filling up of the House be issued by Friday
next, and that in the mean time, he would retire into the City and
only leave them guards for the security of the House and Council. The
occasion of this was the order that he had last night to go into the
City and disarm them, and take away their charter; whereby he and his
officers say that the House had a mind to put them upon things that
should make them odious; and so it would be in their power to do what
they would with them. He told us that they [the Parliament] had sent
Scott and Robinson to him [Monk] this afternoon, but he would not hear
them. And that the Mayor and Aldermen had offered him their own houses
for himself and his officers; and that his soldiers would lack for
nothing. And indeed I saw many people give the soldiers drink and money,
and all along in the streets cried, “God bless them!” and extraordinary
good words. Hence we went to a merchant’s house hard by, where Lock
wrote a note and left, where I saw Sir Nich. Crisp, and so we went to
the Star Tavern (Monk being then at Benson’s), where we dined and I
wrote a letter to my Lord from thence. In Cheapside there was a great
many bonfires, and Bow bells and all the bells in all the churches as
we went home were a-ringing. Hence we went homewards, it being about ten
o’clock. But the common joy that was every where to be seen! The number
of bonfires, there being fourteen between St. Dunstan’s and Temple Bar,
and at Strand Bridge’ I could at one view tell thirty-one fires. In
King-street seven or eight; and all along burning, and roasting, and
drinking for rumps. There being rumps tied upon sticks and carried up
and down. The butchers at the May Pole in the Strand rang a peal with
their knives when they were going to sacrifice their rump. On Ludgate
Hill there was one turning of the spit that had a rump tied upon it,
and another basting of it. Indeed it was past imagination, both the
greatness and the suddenness of it. At one end of the street you would
think there was a whole lane of fire, and so hot that we were fain to
keep still on the further side merely for heat. We came to the Chequers
at Charing Cross, where Chetwind wrote a letter and I gave him an
account of what I had wrote for him to write. Thence home and sent my
letters to the posthouse in London, and my wife and I (after Mr. Hunt
was gone, whom I found waiting at my house) went out again to show her
the fires, and after walking as far as the Exchange we returned and to
bed.