22d. This morning came the carpenters to make me a door at the other
side of my house, going into the entry, which I was much pleased with.
At noon my wife and I walked to the Old Exchange, and there she bought
her a white whisk

     [A gorget or neckerchief worn by women at this time.  “A woman’s
     neck whisk is used both plain and laced, and is called of most a
     gorget or falling whisk, because it falleth about the shoulders.”
      --Randle Hohnt (quoted by Planche).]

and put it on, and I a pair of gloves, and so we took coach for
Whitehall to Mr. Fox’s, where we found Mrs. Fox within, and an alderman
of London paying L1000 or L1500 in gold upon the table for the King,
which was the most gold that ever I saw together in my life. Mr. Fox
came in presently and did receive us with a great deal of respect; and
then did take my wife and I to the Queen’s presence-chamber; where he
got my wife placed behind the Queen’s chair, and I got into the crowd,
and by and by the Queen and the two Princesses came to dinner. The Queen
a very little plain old woman, and nothing more in her presence in any
respect nor garb than any ordinary woman. The Princess of Orange I had
often seen before. The Princess Henrietta is very pretty, but much below
my expectation; and her dressing of herself with her hair frized short
up to her ears, did make her seem so much the less to me. But my wife
standing near her with two or three black patches on, and well dressed,
did seem to me much handsomer than she. Dinner being done, we went to
Mr. Fox’s again, where many gentlemen dined with us, and most princely
dinner, all provided for me and my friends, but I bringing none but
myself and wife, he did call the company to help to eat up so much good
victuals. At the end of dinner, my Lord Sandwich’s health was drunk in
the gilt tankard that I did give to Mrs. Fox the other day. After dinner
I had notice given me by Will my man that my Lord did inquire for me,
so I went to find him, and met him and the Duke of York in a coach going
towards Charing Cross. I endeavoured to follow them but could not, so
I returned to Mr. Fox, and after much kindness and good discourse we
parted from thence. I took coach for my wife and me homewards, and I
light at the Maypole in the Strand, and sent my wife home. I to the new
playhouse and saw part of the “Traitor,” a very good Tragedy; Mr. Moon
did act the Traitor very well. So to my Lord’s, and sat there with my
Lady a great while talking. Among other things, she took occasion to
inquire (by Madame Dury’s late discourse with her) how I did treat my
wife’s father and mother. At which I did give her a good account, and
she seemed to be very well opinioned of my wife. From thence to White
Hall at about 9 at night, and there, with Laud the page that went with
me, we could not get out of Henry the Eighth’s gallery into the further
part of the boarded gallery, where my Lord was walking with my Lord
Ormond; and we had a key of Sir S. Morland’s, but all would not do; till
at last, by knocking, Mr. Harrison the door-keeper did open us the door,
and, after some talk with my Lord about getting a catch to carry my Lord
St. Albans a goods to France, I parted and went home on foot, it being
very late and dirty, and so weary to bed.