16th. Up early to my father’s, where by appointment Mr. Moore came to
me, and he and I to the Temple, and thence to Westminster Hall to speak
with Mr. Wm. Montagu about his looking upon the title of those lands
which I do take as security for L3000 of my Lord’s money. That being
done Mr. Moore and I parted, and in the Hall I met with Mr. Fontleroy
(my old acquaintance, whom I had not seen a long time), and he and I to
the Swan, and in discourse he seems to be wise and say little, though I
know things are changed against his mind. Thence home by water, where my
father, Mr. Snow, and Mr. Moore did dine with me. After dinner Mr. Snow
and I went up together to discourse about the putting out of L80 to a
man who lacks the money and would give me L15 per annum for 8 years
for it, which I did not think profit enough, and so he seemed to be
disappointed by my refusal of it, but I would not now part with my money
easily. He seems to do it as a great favour to me to offer to come in
upon a way of getting of money, which they call Bottomry,

     [“The contract of bottomry is a negotiable instrument, which may be
     put in suit by the person to whom it is transferred; it is in use in
     all countries of maritime commerce and interests.  A contract in the
     nature of a mortgage of a ship, when the owner of it borrows money
     to enable him to carry on the voyage, and pledges the keel or bottom
     of the ship as a security for the repayment.  If the ship be lost
     the lender loses his whole money; but if it returns in safety, then
     he shall receive back his principal, and also the premium stipulated
     to be paid, however it may exceed the usual or legal rate of
     interest.”--Smyth’s “Sailor’s Word Book”.]

which I do not yet understand, but do believe there may be something in
it of great profit. After we were parted I went to the office, and there
we sat all the afternoon, and at night we went to a barrel of oysters
at Sir W. Batten’s, and so home, and I to the setting of my papers in
order, which did keep me up late. So to bed.