19th (Lord’s day). Early in the morning I set my books that I brought
home yesterday up in order in my study. Thence forth to Mr. Harper’s to
drink a draft of purle,--[Purl is hot beer flavoured with wormwood or
other aromatic herbs. The name is also given to hot beer flavoured with
gin, sugar, and ginger.]--whither by appointment Monsieur L’Impertinent,
who did intend too upon my desire to go along with me to St.
Bartholomew’s, to hear one Mr. Sparks, but it raining very hard we went
to Mr. Gunning’s and heard an excellent sermon, and speaking of the
character that the Scripture gives of Ann the mother of the blessed
Virgin, he did there speak largely in commendation of widowhood, and
not as we do to marry two or three wives or husbands, one after another.
Here I met with Mr. Moore, and went home with him to dinner, where he
told me the discourse that happened between the secluded members and the
members of the House, before Monk last Friday. How the secluded said,
that they did not intend by coming in to express revenge upon these men,
but only to meet and dissolve themselves, and only to issue writs for a
free Parliament. He told me how Haselrigge was afraid to have the candle
carried before him, for fear that the people seeing him, would do him
hurt; and that he is afraid to appear in the City. That there is great
likelihood that the secluded members will come in, and so Mr. Crew and
my Lord are likely to be great men, at which I was very glad. After
diner there was many secluded members come in to Mr. Crew, which,
it being the Lord’s day, did make Mr. Moore believe that there was
something extraordinary in the business. Hence home and brought my wife
to Mr. Mossum’s to hear him, and indeed he made a very good sermon, but
only too eloquent for a pulpit. Here Mr. L’Impertinent helped me to a
seat. After sermon to my father’s; and fell in discourse concerning our
going to Cambridge the next week with my brother John. To Mrs. Turner
where her brother, Mr. Edward Pepys, was there, and I sat a great while
talking of public business of the times with him. So to supper to my
Father’s, all supper talking of John’s going to Cambridge. So home, and
it raining my wife got my mother’s French mantle and my brother John’s
hat, and so we went all along home and to bed.