12th. In the morning, it being Lord’s day, Mr. Pierce came to me to
enquire how things go. We drank our morning draft together and thence
to White Hall, where Dr. Hones preached; but I staid not to hear, but
walking in the court, I heard that Sir Arth. Haselrigge was newly gone
into the City to Monk, and that Monk’s wife removed from White Hall last
night. Home again, where at noon came according to my invitation my cos.
Thos. Pepys and his partner and dined with me, but before dinner we went
and took a walk round the park, it being a most pleasant day as ever I
saw. After dinner we three went into London together, where I heard that
Monk had been at Paul’s in the morning, and the people had shouted much
at his coming out of the church. In the afternoon he was at a church in
Broad-street, whereabout he do lodge. But not knowing how to see him we
went and walked half a hour in Moorfields, which were full of people, it
being so fine a day. Here I took leave of them, and so to Paul’s, where
I met with Mr. Kirton’s’ apprentice (the crooked fellow) and walked
up and down with him two hours, sometimes in the street looking for a
tavern to drink in, but not finding any open, we durst not knock; other
times in the churchyard, where one told me that he had seen the letter
printed. Thence to Mr. Turner’s, where I found my wife, Mr. Edw. Pepys,
and Roger’ and Mr. Armiger being there, to whom I gave as good an
account of things as I could, and so to my father’s, where Charles
Glascocke was overjoyed to see how things are now; who told me the boys
had last night broke Barebone’s windows. Hence home, and being near home
we missed our maid, and were at a great loss and went back a great way
to find her, but when we could not see her we went homewards and found
her there, got before us which we wondered at greatly. So to bed, where
my wife and I had some high words upon my telling her that I would fling
the dog which her brother gave her out of window if he [dirtied] the
house any more.