20th. About two o’clock my wife wakes me, and comes to bed, and so both
to sleep and the wench to wash. I rose and with Will to my Lord’s by
land, it being a very hard frost, the first we have had this year. There
I staid with my Lord and Mr. Shepley, looking over my Lord’s accounts
and to set matters straight between him and Shepley, and he did commit
the viewing of these accounts to me, which was a great joy to me to see
that my Lord do look upon me as one to put trust in. Hence to the organ,
where Mr. Child and one Mr Mackworth (who plays finely upon the violin)
were playing, and so we played till dinner and then dined, where my Lord
in a very good humour and kind to me. After dinner to the Temple, where
I met Mr. Moore and discoursed with him about the business of putting
out my Lord’s L3000, and that done, Mr. Shepley and I to the new
Play-house near Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields (which was formerly Gibbon’s
tennis-court), where the play of “Beggar’s Bush” was newly begun; and so
we went in and saw it, it was well acted: and here I saw the first time
one Moone,

     [Michael Mohun, or Moone, the celebrated actor, who had borne a
     major’s commission in the King’s army.  The period of his death is
     uncertain, but he is known to have been dead in 1691.  Downes
     relates that an eminent poet [Lee] seeing him act Mithridates
     “vented suddenly this saying: ‘Oh, Mohun, Mohun, thou little man of
     mettle, if I should write a 100, I’d write a part for thy mouth.’”
      --Roscius Anglicanus, p.  17.]

who is said to be the best actor in the world, lately come over with the
King, and indeed it is the finest play-house, I believe, that ever was
in England. From thence, after a pot of ale with Mr. Shepley at a house
hard by, I went by link home, calling a little by the way at my father’s
and my uncle Fenner’s, where all pretty well, and so home, where I found
the house in a washing pickle, and my wife in a very joyful condition
when I told her that she is to see the Queen next Thursday, which puts
me in mind to say that this morning I found my Lord in bed late, he
having been with the King, Queen, and Princess, at the Cockpit

     [The Cockpit at Whitehall.  The plays at the Cockpit in Drury Lane
     were acted in the afternoon.]

all night, where. General Monk treated them; and after supper a play,
where the King did put a great affront upon Singleton’s’ musique, he
bidding them stop and bade the French musique play, which, my Lord says,
do much outdo all ours. But while my Lord was rising, I went to Mr.
Fox’s, and there did leave the gilt tankard for Mrs. Fox, and then to
the counting-house to him, who hath invited me and my wife to dine with
him on Thursday next, and so to see the Queen and Princesses.