21st. So into my naked bed

     [This is a somewhat late use of an expression which was once
     universal.  It was formerly the custom for both sexes to sleep in
     bed without any nightlinen.

              “Who sees his true love in her naked bed,
               Teaching the sheets a whiter hue than white.”

                              Shakespeare, Venus and Adonis.

     Nares (“Glossary”) notes the expression so late as in the very odd
     novel by T. Amory, called “John Bunde,” where a young lady declares,
     after an alarm, “that she would never go into naked bed on board
     ship again.”  Octavo edition, vol. i.  p. 90.]

and slept till 9 o’clock, and then John Goods waked me, [by] and by the
captain’s boy brought me four barrels of Mallows oysters, which Captain
Tatnell had sent me from Murlace.--[Apparently Mallows stands for St.
Malo and Murlace for Morlaise.]--The weather foul all this day also.
After dinner, about writing one thing or other all day, and setting my
papers in order, having been so long absent. At night Mr. Pierce, Purser
(the other Pierce and I having not spoken to one another since we fell
out about Mr. Edward), and Mr. Cook sat with me in my cabin and supped
with me, and then I went to bed. By letters that came hither in my
absence, I understand that the Parliament had ordered all persons to be
secured, in order to a trial, that did sit as judges in the late King’s
death, and all the officers too attending the Court. Sir John Lenthall
moving in the House, that all that had borne arms against the King
should be exempted from pardon, he was called to the bar of the House,
and after a severe reproof he was degraded his knighthood. At Court I
find that all things grow high. The old clergy talk as being sure of
their lands again, and laugh at the Presbytery; and it is believed that
the sales of the King’s and Bishops’ lands will never be confirmed by
Parliament, there being nothing now in any man’s, power to hinder them
and the King from doing what they have a mind, but every body willing
to submit to any thing. We expect every day to have the King and Duke
on board as soon as it is fair. My Lord do nothing now, but offers all
things to the pleasure of the Duke as Lord High Admiral. So that I am at
a loss what to do.