8 o’clock. It being done, we carried it to Worcester House to the
Chancellor, where Mr. Kipps (a strange providence that he should now be
in a condition to do me a kindness, which I never thought him capable of
doing for me), got me the Chancellor’s recepi to my bill; and so carried
it to Mr. Beale for a dockett; but he was very angry, and unwilling to
do it, because he said it was ill writ (because I had got it writ by
another hand, and not by him); but by much importunity I got Mr. Spong
to go to his office and make an end of my patent; and in the mean time
Mr. Beale to be preparing my dockett, which being done, I did give him
two pieces, after which it was strange how civil and tractable he was
to me. From thence I went to the Navy office, where we despatched much
business, and resolved of the houses for the Officers and Commissioners,
which I was glad of, and I got leave to have a door made me into the
leads. From thence, much troubled in mind about my patent, I went to Mr.
Beale again, who had now finished my patent and made it ready for the
Seal, about an hour after I went to meet him at the Chancellor’s. So
I went away towards Westminster, and in my way met with Mr. Spong, and
went with him to Mr. Lilly and ate some bread and cheese, and drank with
him, who still would be giving me council of getting my patent out,
for fear of another change, and my Lord Montagu’s fall. After that to
Worcester House, where by Mr. Kipps’s means, and my pressing in General
Montagu’s name to the Chancellor, I did, beyond all expectation, get my
seal passed; and while it was doing in one room, I was forced to keep
Sir G. Carteret (who by chance met me there, ignorant of my business) in
talk, while it was a doing. Went home and brought my wife with me into
London, and some money, with which I paid Mr. Beale L9 in all, and took
my patent of him and went to my wife again, whom I had left in a coach
at the door of Hinde Court, and presented her with my patent at which
she was overjoyed; so to the Navy office, and showed her my house, and
were both mightily pleased at all things there, and so to my business.
So home with her, leaving her at her mother’s door. I to my Lord’s,
where I dispatched an order for a ship to fetch Sir R. Honywood home,
for which I got two pieces of my Lady Honywood by young Mr. Powell. Late
writing letters; and great doings of music at the next house, which was
Whally’s; the King and Dukes there with Madame Palmer,

     [Barbara Villiers, only child of William, second Viscount Grandison,
     born November, 1640, married April 14th, 1659, to Roger Palmer,
     created Earl of Castlemaine, 1661.  She became the King’s mistress
     soon after the Restoration, and was in 1670 made Baroness Nonsuch,
     Countess of Southampton, and Duchess of Cleveland.  She had six
     children by the King, one of them being created Duke of Grafton, and
     the eldest son succeeding her as Duke of Cleveland.  She
     subsequently married Beau Fielding, whom she prosecuted for bigamy.
     She died October 9th, 1709, aged sixty-nine.  Her life was written
     by G. Steinman Steinman, and privately printed 1871, with addenda