March 26th below.  Although not suffering from this cause again
     until the end of his life, there are frequent references in the
     Diary to pain whenever he caught cold.  In a letter from Pepys to
     his nephew Jackson, April 8th, 1700, there is a reference to the
     breaking out three years before his death of the wound caused by the
     cutting for the stone: “It has been my calamity for much the
     greatest part of this time to have been kept bedrid, under an evil
     so rarely known as to have had it matter of universal surprise and
     with little less general opinion of its dangerousness; namely, that
     the cicatrice of a wound occasioned upon my cutting for the stone,
     without hearing anything of it in all this time, should after more
     than 40 years’ perfect cure, break out again.”  At the post-mortem
     examination a nest of seven stones, weighing four and a half ounces,
     was found in the left kidney, which was entirely ulcerated.]

I lived in Axe Yard,

     [Pepys’s house was on the south side of King Street, Westminster;
     it is singular that when he removed to a residence in the city, he
     should have settled close to another Axe Yard.  Fludyer Street
     stands on the site of Axe Yard, which derived its name from a great
     messuage or brewhouse on the west side of King Street, called “The
     Axe,” and referred to in a document of the 23rd of Henry VIII--B.]

having my wife, and servant Jane, and no more in family than us three.
My wife.... gave me hopes of her being with child, but on the last day
of the year....[the hope was belied.]

[Ed. note:.... are used to denote censored passages]

The condition of the State was thus; viz. the Rump, after being
disturbed by my Lord Lambert,

     [John Lambert, major-general in the Parliamentary army.  The title
     Lord was not his by right, but it was frequently given to the
     republican officers.  He was born in 1619, at Calton Hall, in the
     parish of Kirkby-in-Malham-Dale, in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
     In 1642 he was appointed captain of horse under Fairfax, and acted
     as major-general to Cromwell in 1650 during the war in Scotland.
     After this Parliament conferred on him a grant of lands in Scotland
     worth L1000 per annum.  He refused to take the oath of allegiance to
     Cromwell, for which the Protector deprived him of his commission.
     After Cromwell’s death he tried to set up a military government.
     The Commons cashiered Lambert, Desborough, and other officers,