27th (Lord’s day). Called up by John Goods to see the Garter and Heralds
coat, which lay in the coach, brought by Sir Edward Walker,

     [Edward Walker was knighted February 2nd, 1644-5, and on the 24th of
     the same month was sworn in as Garter King at Arms.  He adhered to
     the cause of the king, and published “Iter Carolinum”, being a
     succinct account of the necessitated marches, retreats, and
     sufferings of his Majesty King Charles I., from Jan. 10, 1641, to
     the time of his death in 1648, collected by a daily attendant upon
     his sacred Majesty during all that time: He joined Charles II. in
     exile, and received the reward of his loyalty at the Restoration.
     He died at Whitehall, February 19th, 1676-7, and was buried at
     Stratford-on-Avon, his daughter having married Sir John Clepton of
     that place.]

King at Arms, this morning, for my Lord. My Lord hath summoned all the
Commanders on board him, to see the ceremony, which was thus: Sir Edward
putting on his coat, and having laid the George and Garter, and the
King’s letter to my Lord, upon a crimson cushion (in the coach, all the
Commanders standing by), makes three congees to him, holding the cushion
in his arms. Then laying it down with the things upon it upon a chair,
he takes the letter, and delivers it to my Lord, which my Lord breaks
open and gives him to read. It was directed to our trusty and well
beloved Sir Edward Montagu, Knight, one of our Generals at sea, and our
Companion elect of our Noble Order of the Garter. The contents of the
letter is to show that the Kings of England have for many years made
use of this honour, as a special mark of favour, to persons of good
extraction and virtue (and that many Emperors, Kings and Princes of
other countries have borne this honour), and that whereas my Lord is of
a noble family, and hath now done the King such service by sea, at this
time, as he hath done; he do send him this George and Garter to wear as
Knight of the Order, with a dispensation for the other ceremonies of
the habit of the Order, and other things, till hereafter, when it can
be done. So the herald putting the ribbon about his neck, and the Garter
about his left leg, he salutes him with joy as Knight of the Garter, and
that was all. After that was done, and the Captain and I had breakfasted
with Sir Edward while my Lord was writing of a letter, he took his leave
of my Lord, and so to shore again to the King at Canterbury, where he
yesterday gave the like honour to General Monk,

     [“His Majesty put the George on his Excellency, and the two Dukes
     put on the Garter.  The Princes thus honoured the Lord-General for
     the restoration of that lawful family.”--Rugge’s Diurnal.]

who are the only two for many years that have had the Garter given them,
before they had other honours of Earldom, or the like, excepting only
the Duke of Buckingham, who was only Sir George Villiers when he was
made Knight of the Garter. A while after Mr. Thos. Crew and Mr. J.
Pickering (who had staid long enough to make all the world see him to be
a fool), took ship for London. So there now remain no strangers with
my Lord but Mr. Hetley, who had been with us a day before the King went
from us. My Lord and the ship’s company down to sermon. I staid above to
write and look over my new song book, which came last night to me from
London in lieu of that that my Lord had of me. The officers being all
on board, there was not room for me at table, so I dined in my cabin,
where, among other things, Mr. Drum brought me a lobster and a bottle of
oil, instead of a bottle of vinegar, whereby I spoiled my dinner. Many
orders in the ordering of ships this afternoon. Late to a sermon. After
that up to the Lieutenant’s cabin, where Mr. Sheply, I, and the Minister
supped, and after that I went down to W. Howe’s cabin, and there, with a
great deal of pleasure, singing till it was late. After that to bed.