2nd. With Sir Wm. Pen by water to Whitehall, being this morning visited
before I went out by my brother Tom, who told me that for his lying out
of doors a day and a night my father had forbade him to come any more
into his house, at which I was troubled, and did soundly chide him for
doing so, and upon confessing his fault I told him I would speak to my
father. At Whitehall I met with Captain Clerk, and took him to the Leg
in King Street, and did give him a dish or two of meat, and his purser
that was with him, for his old kindness to me on board. After dinner I
to Whitehall, where I met with Mrs. Hunt, and was forced to wait upon
Mr. Scawen at a committee to speak for her husband, which I did. After
that met with Luellin, Mr. Fage, and took them both to the Dog, and did
give them a glass of wine. After that at Will’s I met with Mr. Spicer,
and with him to the Abbey to see them at vespers. There I found but a
thin congregation already. So I see that religion, be it what it will,
is but a humour,

     [The four humours of the body described by the old physicians were
     supposed to exert their influence upon the mind, and in course of
     time the mind as well as the body was credited with its own
     particular humours.  The modern restricted use of the word humour
     did not become general until the eighteenth century.]

and so the esteem of it passeth as other things do. From thence with him
to see Robin Shaw, who has been a long time ill, and I have not seen
him since I came from sea. He is much changed, but in hopes to be well
again. From thence by coach to my father’s, and discoursed with him
about Tom, and did give my advice to take him home again, which I think
he will do in prudence rather than put him upon learning the way of
being worse. So home, and from home to Major Hart, who is just going
out of town to-morrow, and made much of me, and did give me the oaths of
supremacy and allegiance, that I may be capable of my arrears. So home
again, where my wife tells me what she has bought to-day, namely, a bed
and furniture for her chamber, with which very well pleased I went to
bed.