4th. I wrote this morning many letters, and to all the copies of the
vote of the council of war I put my name, that if it should come in
print my name maybe at it. I sent a copy of the vote to Doling, inclosed
in this letter:

     “SIR,

     “He that can fancy a fleet (like ours) in her pride, with pendants
     loose, guns roaring, caps flying, and the loud ‘Vive le Roys,’
     echoed from one ship’s company to another, he, and he only, can
     apprehend the joy this inclosed vote was received with, or the
     blessing he thought himself possessed of that bore it, and is

                                   “Your humble servant.”

About nine o’clock I got all my letters done, and sent them by the
messenger that came yesterday. This morning came Captain Isham on board
with a gentleman going to the King, by whom very cunningly, my Lord
tells me, he intends to send an account of this day’s and yesterday’s
actions here, notwithstanding he had writ to the Parliament to have
leave of them to send the King the answer of the fleet. Since my writing
of the last paragraph, my Lord called me to him to read his letter to
the King, to see whether I could find any slips in it or no. And as much
of the letter’ as I can remember, is thus:

     “May it please your Most Excellent Majesty,” and so begins.

     “That he yesterday received from General Monk his Majesty’s letter
     and direction; and that General Monk had desired him to write to the
     Parliament to have leave to send the vote of the seamen before he
     did send it to him, which he had done by writing to both Speakers;
     but for his private satisfaction he had sent it thus privately (and
     so the copy of the proceedings yesterday was sent him), and that
     this come by a gentleman that came this day on board, intending to
     wait upon his Majesty, that he is my Lord’s countryman, and one
     whose friends have suffered much on his Majesty’s behalf.  That my
     Lords Pembroke and Salisbury are put out of the House of Lords.
     That my Lord is very joyful that other countries do pay him the
     civility and respect due to him; and that he do much rejoice to see
     that the King do resolve to receive none of their assistance (or
     some such words), from them, he having strength enough in the love
     and loyalty of his own subjects to support him.  That his Majesty
     had chosen the best place, Scheveling,--[Schevingen, the port of the
     Hague]--for his embarking, and that there is nothing in the world of
     which he is more ambitious, than to have the honour of attending his
     Majesty, which he hoped would be speedy.  That he had commanded the
     vessel to attend at Helversluce--[Hellevoetsluis, in South Holland]
     --till this gentleman returns, that so if his Majesty do not think
     it fit to command the fleet himself, yet that he may be there to
     receive his commands and bring them to his Lordship.  He ends his
     letter, that he is confounded with the thoughts of the high
     expressions of love to him in the King’s letter, and concludes,

     “Your most loyall, dutifull, faithfull and obedient subject and
     servant, E. M.”

The rest of the afternoon at ninepins. In the evening came a packet from
London, among the rest a letter from my wife, which tells me that she
has not been well, which did exceedingly trouble me, but my Lord sending
Mr. Cook at night, I wrote to her and sent a piece of gold enclosed to
her, and wrote also to Mrs. Bowyer, and enclosed a half piece to her
for a token. After supper at the table in the coach, my Lord talking
concerning the uncertainty of the places of the Exchequer to them that
had them now; he did at last think of an office which do belong to him
in case the King do restore every man to his places that ever had been
patent, which is to be one of the clerks of the signet, which will be a
fine employment for one of his sons. After all this discourse we broke
up and to bed.

In the afternoon came a minister on board, one Mr. Sharpe, who is going
to the King; who tells me that Commissioners are chosen both of Lords
and Commons to go to the King; and that Dr. Clarges

     [Thomas Clarges, physician to the army, created a baronet, 1674,
     died 1695.  He had been previously knighted; his sister Anne married
     General Monk.  “The Parliament also permitted General Monk to send
     Mr. Clarges, his brother-in-law, accompanied with some officers of
     the army, to assure his Majesty of the fidelity and obedience of the
     army, which had made publick and solemn protestations thereof, after
     the Letter and Declaration was communicated unto them by the
     General.”--Sir William Lowers Relation... of the Voiage and
     Residence which... Charles the II.  Hath made in Holland,
     Hague, 1660, folio.]

is going to him from the Army, and that he will be here to-morrow. My
letters at night tell me, that the House did deliver their letter to Sir
John Greenville, in answer to the King’s sending, and that they give
him L500 for his pains, to buy him a jewel, and that besides the L50,000
ordered to be borrowed of the City for the present use of the King, the
twelve companies of the City do give every one of them to his Majesty,
as a present, L1000.