17th. Up, and breakfast with my Lady. Then come Captains Cuttance and
Blake to carry her in the barge on board; and so we went through Ham
Creeke to the Soverayne (a goodly sight all the way to see the brave
ships that lie here) first, which is a most noble ship. I never saw her
before. My Lady Sandwich, my Lady Jemimah, Mrs. Browne, Mrs. Grace,
and Mary and the page, my lady’s servants and myself, all went into the
lanthorn together. From thence to the Charles, where my lady took great
pleasure to see all the rooms, and to hear me tell her how things are
when my Lord is there. After we had seen all, then the officers of
the ship had prepared a handsome breakfast for her, and while she was
pledging my Lord’s health they give her five guns. That done, we went
off, and then they give us thirteen guns more. I confess it was a great
pleasure to myself to see the ship that I begun my good fortune in. From
thence on board the Newcastle, to show my Lady the difference between
a great and a small ship. Among these ships I did give away L7. So back
again and went on shore at Chatham, where I had ordered the coach to
wait for us. Here I heard that Sir William Batten and his lady (who I
knew were here, and did endeavour to avoyd) were now gone this morning
to London. So we took coach, and I went into the coach, and went through
the town, without making stop at our inn, but left J. Goods to pay the
reckoning. So I rode with my lady in the coach, and the page on the
horse that I should have rid on--he desiring it. It begun to be dark
before we could come to Dartford, and to rain hard, and the horses
to fayle, which was our great care to prevent, for fear of my Lord’s
displeasure, so here we sat up for to-night, as also Captains Cuttance
and Blake, who came along with us. We sat and talked till supper, and at
supper my Lady and I entered into a great dispute concerning what were
best for a man to do with his estate--whether to make his elder son
heir, which my Lady is for, and I against, but rather to make all
equall. This discourse took us much time, till it was time to go to bed;
but we being merry, we bade my Lady goodnight, and intended to have gone
to the Post-house to drink, and hear a pretty girl play of the cittern
(and indeed we should have lain there, but by a mistake we did not), but
it was late, and we could not hear her, and the guard came to examine
what we were; so we returned to our Inn and to bed, the page and I in
one bed, and the two captains in another, all in one chamber, where we
had very good mirth with our most abominable lodging.