10th. There comes Mr. Hawley to me and brings me my money for the
quarter of a year’s salary of my place under Downing that I was at sea.
So I did give him half, whereof he did in his nobleness give the odd 5s,
to my Jane. So we both went forth (calling first to see how Sir W. Pen
do, whom I found very ill), and at the Hoop by the bridge we drank two
pints of wormwood and sack. Talking of his wooing afresh of Mrs. Lane,
and of his going to serve the Bishop of London. Thence by water to
Whitehall, and found my wife at Mrs. Hunt’s. Leaving her to dine there,
I went and dined with my Lady, and staid to talk a while with her. After
dinner Will. comes to tell me that he had presented my piece of plate to
Mr. Coventry, who takes it very kindly, and sends me a very kind letter,
and the plate back again; of which my heart is very glad. So to Mrs.
Hunt, where I found a Frenchman, a lodger of hers, at dinner, and just
as I came in was kissing my wife, which I did not like, though there
could not be any hurt in it. Thence by coach to my Uncle Wight’s with my
wife, but they being out of doors we went home, where, after I had put
some papers in order and entered some letters in my book which I have
a mind to keep, I went with my wife to see Sir W. Pen, who we found ill
still, but he do make very much of it. Here we sat a great while, at
last comes in Mr. Davis and his lady (who takes it very ill that my wife
never did go to see her), and so we fell to talk. Among other things Mr.
Davis told us the particular examinations of these Fanatiques that are
taken: and in short it is this, of all these Fanatiques that have done
all this, viz., routed all the Trainbands that they met with, put the
King’s life-guards to the run, killed about twenty men, broke through
the City gates twice; and all this in the day-time, when all the City
was in arms; are not in all about 31. Whereas we did believe them
(because they were seen up and down in every place almost in the City,
and had been about Highgate two or three days, and in several other
places) to be at least 500. A thing that never was heard of, that so
few men should dare and do so much mischief. Their word was, “The King
Jesus, and the heads upon the gates.” Few of them would receive any
quarter, but such as were taken by force and kept alive; expecting Jesus
to come here and reign in the world presently, and will not believe yet
but their work will be carried on though they do die. The King this day
came to town.