19th. At the office all the morning; at noon the children are sent for
by their mother my Lady Sandwich to dinner, and my wife goes along with
them by coach, and she to my father’s and dines there, and from thence
with them to see Mrs. Cordery, who do invite them before my father goes
into the country, and thither I should have gone too but that I am sent
for to the Privy Seal, and there I found a thing of my Lord Chancellor’s

     [This “thing” was probably one of those large grants which Clarendon
     quietly, or, as he himself says, “without noise or scandal,”
      procured from the king.  Besides lands and manors, Clarendon states
     at one time that the king gave him a “little billet into his hand,
     that contained a warrant of his own hand-writing to Sir Stephen Fox
     to pay to the Chancellor the sum of L20,000,--[approximately 10
     million dollars in the year 2000]--of which nobody could have
     notice.”  In 1662 he received L5,000 out of the money voted to the
     king by the Parliament of Ireland, as he mentions in his vindication
     of himself against the impeachment of the Commons; and we shall see
     that Pepys, in February, 1664, names another sum of L20,000 given to
     the Chancellor to clear the mortgage upon Clarendon Park; and this
     last sum, it was believed, was paid from the money received from
     France by the sale of Dunkirk.--B.]

to be sealed this afternoon, and so I am forced to go to Worcester
House, where severall Lords are met in Council this afternoon. And while
I am waiting there, in comes the King in a plain common riding-suit and
velvet cap, in which he seemed a very ordinary man to one that had not
known him. Here I staid till at last, hearing that my Lord Privy Seal
had not the seal here, Mr. Moore and I hired a coach and went to Chelsy,
and there at an alehouse sat and drank and past the time till my Lord
Privy Seal came to his house, and so we to him and examined and sealed
the thing, and so homewards, but when we came to look for our coach we
found it gone, so we were fain to walk home afoot and saved our money.
We met with a companion that walked with us, and coming among some
trees near the Neate houses, he began to whistle, which did give us some
suspicion, but it proved that he that answered him was Mr. Marsh (the
Lutenist) and his wife, and so we all walked to Westminster together,
in our way drinking a while at my cost, and had a song of him, but his
voice is quite lost. So walked home, and there I found that my Lady do
keep the children at home, and lets them not come any more hither at
present, which a little troubles me to lose their company. This day my
aunt Fenner dyed.