January 1st. Called up this morning by Mr. Moore, who brought me my last
things for me to sign for the last month, and to my great comfort tells
me that my fees will come to L80 clear to myself, and about L25 for him,
which he hath got out of the pardons, though there be no fee due to me
at all out of them. Then comes in my brother Thomas, and after him my
father, Dr. Thomas Pepys, my uncle Fenner and his two sons (Anthony’s’
only child dying this morning, yet he was so civil to come, and was
pretty merry) to breakfast; and I had for them a barrel of oysters, a
dish of neat’s tongues, and a dish of anchovies, wine of all sorts, and
Northdown ale. We were very merry till about eleven o’clock, and then
they went away. At noon I carried my wife by coach to my cozen, Thomas
Pepys, where we, with my father, Dr. Thomas, cozen Stradwick, Scott, and
their wives, dined. Here I saw first his second wife, which is a very
respectfull woman, but his dinner a sorry, poor dinner for a man of his
estate, there being nothing but ordinary meat in it. To-day the King
dined at a lord’s, two doors from us. After dinner I took my wife
to Whitehall, I sent her to Mrs. Pierces (where we should have dined
today), and I to the Privy Seal, where Mr. Moore took out all his money,
and he and I went to Mr. Pierces; in our way seeing the Duke of York
bring his Lady this day to wait upon the Queen, the first time that ever
she did since that great business; and the Queen is said to receive her
now with much respect and love; and there he cast up the fees, and I
told the money, by the same token one L100 bag, after I had told it,
fell all about the room, and I fear I have lost some of it. That done I
left my friends and went to my Lord’s, but he being not come in I lodged
the money with Mr. Shepley, and bade good night to Mr. Moore, and so
returned to Mr. Pierces, and there supped with them, and Mr. Pierce, the
purser, and his wife and mine, where we had a calf’s head carboned,

     [Meat cut crosswise and broiled was said to be carboned.  Falstaff
     says in “King Henry IV.,” Part L, act v., sc. 3, “Well, if Percy be
     alive, I’ll pierce him.  If he do come in my way, so; if he do not,
     if I come in his willingly, let him make a carbonado of me.”]

but it was raw, we could not eat it, and a good hen. But she is such a
slut that I do not love her victualls. After supper I sent them home
by coach, and I went to my Lord’s and there played till 12 at night
at cards at Best with J. Goods and N. Osgood, and then to bed with Mr.
Shepley.