30th (Lord’s day). To church, where we observe the trade of briefs is
come now up to so constant a course every Sunday, that we resolve to
give no more to them.

     [It appears, from an old MS. account-book of the collections in the
     church of St. Olave, Hart Street, beginning in 1642, still extant,
     that the money gathered on the 30th June, 1661, “for several
     inhabitants of the parish of St. Dunstan in the West towards their
     losse by fire,” amounted to “xxs. viiid.”  Pepys might complain of
     the trade in briefs, as similar contributions had been levied
     fourteen weeks successively, previous to the one in question at St.
     Olave’s church.  Briefs were abolished in 1828.--B.]

A good sermon, and then home to dinner, my wife and I all alone. After
dinner Sir Williams both and I by water to Whitehall, where having
walked up and down, at last we met with the Duke of York, according to
an order sent us yesterday from him, to give him an account where the
fault lay in the not sending out of the ships, which we find to be only
the wind hath been against them, and so they could not get out of the
river. Hence I to Graye’s Inn Walk, all alone, and with great pleasure
seeing the fine ladies walk there. Myself humming to myself (which
now-a-days is my constant practice since I begun to learn to sing) the
trillo, and found by use that it do come upon me. Home very weary and
to bed, finding my wife not sick, but yet out of order, that I fear she
will come to be sick. This day the Portuguese Embassador came to White
Hall to take leave of the King; he being now going to end all with the
Queen, and to send her over. The weather now very fair and pleasant, but
very hot. My father gone to Brampton to see my uncle Robert, not knowing
whether to find him dead or alive. Myself lately under a great expense
of money upon myself in clothes and other things, but I hope to make it
up this summer by my having to do in getting things ready to send with
the next fleet to the Queen.

Myself in good health, but mighty apt to take cold, so that this hot
weather I am fain to wear a cloth before my belly.