19th. (Lord’s day) I walked in the morning towards Westminster, and
seeing many people at York House, I went down and found them at mass, it
being the Spanish ambassodors; and so I go into one of the gallerys,
and there heard two masses done, I think, not in so much state as I have
seen them heretofore. After that into the garden, and walked a turn or
two, but found it not so fine a place as I always took it for by the
outside. Thence to my Lord’s and there spake with him about business,
and then he went to Whitehall to dinner, and Capt. Ferrers and Mr. Howe
and myself to Mr. Wilkinson’s at the Crown, and though he had no meat of
his own, yet we happened to find our cook Mr. Robinson there, who had a
dinner for himself and some friends, and so he did give us a very fine
dinner. Then to my Lord’s, where we went and sat talking and laughing
in the drawing-room a great while. All our talk about their going to sea
this voyage, which Capt. Ferrers is in some doubt whether he shall go
or no, but swears that he would go, if he were sure never to come back
again; and I, giving him some hopes, he grew so mad with joy that he
fell a-dancing and leaping like a madman. Now it fell out so that the
balcone windows were open, and he went to the rayle and made an offer
to leap over, and asked what if he should leap over there. I told him I
would give him L40 if he did not go to sea. With that thought I shut the
doors, and W. Howe hindered him all we could; yet he opened them again,
and, with a vault, leaps down into the garden:--the greatest and most
desperate frolic that ever I saw in my life. I run to see what was
become of him, and we found him crawled upon his knees, but could not
rise; so we went down into the garden and dragged him to the bench,
where he looked like a dead man, but could not stir; and, though he had
broke nothing, yet his pain in his back was such as he could not endure.
With this, my Lord (who was in the little new room) come to us in amaze,
and bid us carry him up, which, by our strength, we did, and so laid him
in East’s bed, by the door; where he lay in great pain. We sent for a
doctor and chyrurgeon, but none to be found, till by-and-by by chance
comes in Dr. Clerke, who is afeard of him. So we sent to get a lodging
for him, and I went up to my Lord, where Captain Cooke, Mr. Gibbons, and
others of the King’s musicians were come to present my Lord with some
songs and symphonys, which were performed very finely. Which being done
I took leave and supped at my father’s, where was my cozen Beck come
lately out of the country. I am troubled to see my father so much decay
of a suddain, as he do both in his seeing and hearing, and as much
to hear of him how my brother Tom do grow disrespectful to him and my
mother. I took leave and went home, where to prayers (which I have not
had in my house a good while), and so to bed.