26th. This morning before I went out I made even with my maid Jane, who
has this day been my maid three years, and is this day to go into the
country to her mother. The poor girl cried, and I could hardly forbear
weeping to think of her going, for though she be grown lazy and spoilt
by Pall’s coming, yet I shall never have one to please us better in all
things, and so harmless, while I live. So I paid her her wages and gave
her 2s. 6d. over, and bade her adieu, with my mind full of trouble
at her going. Hence to my father, where he and I and Thomas together
setting things even, and casting up my father’s accounts, and upon the
whole I find that all he hath in money of his own due to him in the
world is but L45, and he owes about the same sum: so that I cannot but
think in what a condition he had left my mother if he should have died
before my uncle Robert. Hence to Tom Trice for the probate of the
will and had it done to my mind, which did give my father and me good
content. From thence to my Lady at the Wardrobe and thence to the
Theatre, and saw the “Antipodes,” wherein there is much mirth, but no
great matter else. Hence with Mr. Bostock whom I met there (a clerk
formerly of Mr. Phelps) to the Devil tavern, and there drank and
so away. I to my uncle Fenner’s, where my father was with him at an
alehouse, and so we three went by ourselves and sat talking a great
while about a broker’s daughter that he do propose for a wife for Tom,
with a great portion, but I fear it will not take, but he will do what
he can. So we broke up, and going through the street we met with a
mother and son, friends of my father’s man, Ned’s, who are angry at my
father’s putting him away, which troubled me and my father, but all will
be well as to that. We have news this morning of my uncle Thomas and his
son Thomas being gone into the country without giving notice thereof to
anybody, which puts us to a stand, but I fear them not. At night at home
I found a letter from my Lord Sandwich, who is now very well again of
his feaver, but not yet gone from Alicante, where he lay sick, and was
twice let blood. This letter dated the 22nd July last, which puts me out
of doubt of his being ill. In my coming home I called in at the Crane
tavern at the Stocks by appointment, and there met and took leave of
Mr. Fanshaw, who goes to-morrow and Captain Isham toward their voyage to
Portugal. Here we drank a great deal of wine, I too much and Mr. Fanshaw
till he could hardly go. So we took leave one of another.