11th. My brother Tom and then Mr. Moore came to me this morning, and
staid a while with me, and then I went out, and in my way met with Mr.
Howell the Turner, who invited me to dine this day at Mr. Rawlinson’s
with some friends of his, officers of the Towre, at a venison pasty,
which I promised him, and so I went to the Old Bayly, and there staid
and drank with him, who told me the whole story how Pegg Kite has
married herself to a weaver, an ugly fellow, to her undoing, of which I
am glad that I have nothing to do in it. From thence home and put on my
velvet coat, and so to the Mitre to dinner according to my promise this
morning, but going up into the room I found at least 12 or more persons,
and knew not the face of any of them, so I went down again, and though
I met Mr. Yong the upholster yet I would not be persuaded to stay, but
went away and walked to the Exchequer, and up and down, and was very
hungry, and from thence home, when I understand Mr. Howell was come for
me to go thither, but I am glad I was not at home, and my wife was gone
out by coach to Clerkenwell to see Mrs. Margaret Pen, who is at school
there. So I went to see Sir W. Pen, who for this two or three days has
not been well, and he and I after some talk took a coach and went to
Moorfields, and there walked, though it was very cold, an hour or two,
and went into an alehouse, and there I drank some ale and eat some bread
and cheese, but he would not eat a bit, and so being very merry we went
home again. He to his lodgings and I by promise to Sir W. Batten’s,
where he and my lady have gone out of town, and so Mrs. Martha was at
home alone, and Mrs. Moore and there I supped upon some good things left
of yesterday’s dinner there, where dined a great deal of company--Sir R.
Browne and others--and by and by comes in Captain Cox who promised to
be here with me, but he staid very late, and had been drinking somewhere
and was very drunk, and so very capricious, which I was troubled to see
in a man that I took for a very wise and wary man. So I home and left
him there, and so to bed.