2d. Up early, and being called up to my Lord he did give me many
commands in his business. As about taking care to write to my uncle that
Mr. Barnewell’s papers should be locked up, in case he should die, he
being now suspected to be very ill. Also about consulting with Mr. W.
Montagu for the settling of the L4000 a-year that the King had promised
my Lord. As also about getting of Mr. George Montagu to be chosen at
Huntingdon this next Parliament, &c. That done he to White Hall stairs
with much company, and I with him; where we took water for Lambeth, and
there coach for Portsmouth. The Queen’s things were all in White Hall
Court ready to be sent away, and her Majesty ready to be gone an hour
after to Hampton Court to-night, and so to be at Ports mouth on Saturday
next. I by water to my office, and there all the morning, and so home
to dinner, where I found Pall (my sister) was come; but I do not let her
sit down at table with me, which I do at first that she may not expect
it hereafter from me. After dinner I to Westminster by water, and there
found my brother Spicer at the Leg with all the rest of the Exchequer
men (most of whom I now do not know) at dinner. Here I staid and
drank with them, and then to Mr. George Montagu about the business of
election, and he did give me a piece in gold; so to my Lord’s and got
the chest of plate brought to the Exchequer, and my brother Spicer put
it into his treasury. So to Will’s with them to a pot of ale, and so
parted. I took a turn in the Hall, and bought the King and Chancellor’s
speeches at the dissolving the Parliament last Saturday. So to my
Lord’s, and took my money I brought ‘thither last night and the silver
candlesticks, and by coach left the latter at Alderman Backwell’s, I
having no use for them, and the former home. There stood a man at our
door, when I carried it in, and saw me, which made me a little afeard.
Up to my chamber and wrote letters to Huntingdon and did other business.
This day I lent Sir W. Batten and Captn. Rider my chine of beef for to
serve at dinner tomorrow at Trinity House, the Duke of Albemarle being
to be there and all the rest of the Brethren, it being a great day for
the reading over of their new Charter, which the King hath newly given
them.