22d. KING’S GOING FROM YE TOWER TO WHITE HALL.

     [The king in the early morning of the 22nd went from Whitehall to
     the Tower by water, so that he might proceed from thence through the
     City to Westminster Abbey, there to be crowned.]

Up early and made myself as fine as I could, and put on my velvet coat,
the first day that I put it on, though made half a year ago. And being
ready, Sir W. Batten, my Lady, and his two daughters and his son
and wife, and Sir W. Pen and his son and I, went to Mr. Young’s, the
flag-maker, in Corne-hill;

     [The members of the Navy Office appear to have chosen Mr. Young’s
     house on account of its nearness to the second triumphal arch,
     situated near the Royal Exchange, which was dedicated to the Navy.]

and there we had a good room to ourselves, with wine and good cake, and
saw the show very well. In which it is impossible to relate the glory
of this day, expressed in the clothes of them that rid, and their horses
and horses clothes, among others, my Lord Sandwich’s. Embroidery and
diamonds were ordinary among them. The Knights of the Bath was a brave
sight of itself; and their Esquires, among which Mr. Armiger was
an Esquire to one of the Knights. Remarquable were the two men that
represent the two Dukes of Normandy and Aquitane. The Bishops come next
after Barons, which is the higher place; which makes me think that the
next Parliament they will be called to the House of Lords. My Lord Monk
rode bare after the King, and led in his hand a spare horse, as being
Master of the Horse. The King, in a most rich embroidered suit and
cloak, looked most noble. Wadlow,

     [Simon Wadlow was the original of “old Sir Simon the king,” the
     favourite air of Squire Western in “Tom Jones.”

              “Hang up all the poor hop-drinkers,
               Cries old Sim, the king of skinkers.”

     Ben Jonson, Verses over the door into the Apollo.]

the vintner, at the Devil; in Fleetstreet, did lead a fine company of
soldiers, all young comely men, in white doublets. There followed the
Vice-Chamberlain, Sir G. Carteret, a company of men all like Turks; but
I know not yet what they are for. The streets all gravelled, and the
houses hung with carpets before them, made brave show, and the ladies
out of the windows, one of which over against us I took much notice of,
and spoke of her, which made good sport among us. So glorious was the
show with gold and silver, that we were not able to look at it, our eyes
at last being so much overcome with it. Both the King and the Duke
of York took notice of us, as he saw us at the window. The show being
ended, Mr. Young did give us a dinner, at which we were very merry,
and pleased above imagination at what we have seen. Sir W. Batten going
home, he and I called and drunk some mum

     [Mum.  Ale brewed with wheat at Brunswick.

              “Sedulous and stout
               With bowls of fattening mum.”

     J. Phillips, Cyder, Vol. ii.  p. 231.]

and laid our wager about my Lady Faulconbridge’s name,

     [Mary, third daughter of Oliver Cromwell, and second wife of Thomas
     Bellasis, second Viscount Fauconberg, created Earl of Fauconberg,