11th. At 2 o’clock, with very great mirth, we went to our lodging and to
bed, and lay till 7, and then called up by Sir W. Batten, so I arose and
we did some business, and then came Captn. Allen, and he and I withdrew
and sang a song or two, and among others took pleasure in “Goe and bee
hanged, that’s good-bye.” The young ladies come too, and so I did again
please myself with Mrs. Rebecca, and about 9 o’clock, after we had
breakfasted, we sett forth for London, and indeed I was a little
troubled to part with Mrs. Rebecca, for which God forgive me. Thus we
went away through Rochester, calling and taking leave of Mr. Alcock
at the door, Capt. Cuttance going with us. We baited at Dartford, and
thence to London, but of all the journeys that ever I made this was the
merriest, and I was in a strange mood for mirth.

Among other things, I got my Lady to let her maid, Mrs. Anne, to ride
all the way on horseback, and she rides exceeding well; and so I called
her my clerk, that she went to wait upon me. I met two little schoolboys
going with pitchers of ale to their schoolmaster to break up against
Easter, and I did drink of some of one of them and give him two pence.
By and by we come to two little girls keeping cows, and I saw one of
them very pretty, so I had a mind to make her ask my blessing, and
telling her that I was her godfather, she asked me innocently whether I
was not Ned Wooding, and I said that I was, so she kneeled down and very
simply called, “Pray, godfather, pray to God to bless me,” which made
us very merry, and I gave her twopence. In several places, I asked women
whether they would sell me their children, but they denied me all, but
said they would give me one to keep for them, if I would. Mrs. Anne and
I rode under the man that hangs upon Shooter’s Hill,

     [Shooter’s Hill, Kent, between the eighth and ninth milestones on
     the Dover road.  It was long a notorious haunt of highwaymen.  The
     custom was to leave the bodies of criminals hanging until the bones
     fell to the ground.]

and a filthy sight it was to see how his flesh is shrunk to his bones.
So home and I found all well, and a deal of work done since I went. I
sent to see how my wife do, who is well, and my brother John come from
Cambridge. To Sir W. Batten’s and there supped, and very merry with the
young ladles. So to bed very sleepy for last night’s work, concluding
that it is the pleasantest journey in all respects that ever I had in my
life.