30th. This morning up by moon-shine, at 5 o’clock, to White Hall, to
meet Mr. Moore at the Privy Seal, but he not being come as appointed,
I went into King Street to the Red Lyon’ to drink my morning draft, and
there I heard of a fray between the two Embassadors of Spain and France;
and that, this day, being the day of the entrance of an Embassador from
Sweden, they intended to fight for the precedence! Our King, I heard,
ordered that no Englishman should meddle in the business,

     [The Comte de Brienne insinuates, in his “Memoirs,” that Charles
     purposely abstained from interfering, in the belief that it was for
     his interest to let France and Spain quarrel, in order to further
     his own designs in the match with Portugal.  Louis certainly held
     that opinion; and he afterwards instructed D’Estrades to solicit
     from the English court the punishment of those Londoners who had
     insulted his ambassador, and to demand the dismissal of De
     Batteville.  Either no Londoner had interfered, or Louis’s demand
     had not in England the same force as in Spain; for no one was
     punished.  The latter part of his request it was clearly not for
     Charles to entertain, much less enforce.--B.]

but let them do what they would. And to that end all the soldiers in the
town were in arms all the day long, and some of the train-bands in the
City; and a great bustle through the City all the day. Then I to the
Privy Seal, and there Mr. Moore and a gentleman being come with him,
we took coach (which was the business I come for) to Chelsy, to my
Lord Privy Seal, and there got him to seal the business. Here I saw by
day-light two very fine pictures in the gallery, that a little while ago
I saw by night; and did also go all over the house, and found it to be
the prettiest contrived house that ever I saw in my life. So to coach
back again; and at White Hall light, and saw the soldiers and people
running up and down the streets. So I went to the Spanish Embassador’s
and the French, and there saw great preparations on both sides; but
the French made the most noise and vaunted most, the other made no stir
almost at all; so that I was afraid the other would have had too great
a conquest over them. Then to the Wardrobe, and dined there, end then
abroad and in Cheapside hear that the Spanish hath got the best of it,
and killed three of the French coach-horses and several men, and is gone
through the City next to our King’s coach; at which, it is strange to
see how all the City did rejoice. And indeed we do naturally all love
the Spanish, and hate the French. But I, as I am in all things curious,
presently got to the water-side, and there took oars to Westminster
Palace, thinking to have seen them come in thither with all the coaches,
but they being come and returned, I ran after them with my boy after me
through all the dirt and the streets full of people; till at last, at
the Mewes, I saw the Spanish coach go, with fifty drawn swords at least
to guard it, and our soldiers shouting for joy. And so I followed the
coach, and then met it at York House, where the embassador lies; and
there it went in with great state. So then I went to the French house,
where I observe still, that there is no men in the world of a more
insolent spirit where they do well, nor before they begin a matter, and
more abject if they do miscarry, than these people are; for they all
look like dead men, and not a word among them, but shake their heads.
The truth is, the Spaniards were not only observed to fight most
desperately, but also they did outwitt them; first in lining their own
harness with chains of iron that they could not be cut, then in setting
their coach in the most advantageous place, and to appoint men to guard
every one of their horses, and others for to guard the coach, and others
the coachmen. And, above all, in setting upon the French horses and
killing them, for by that means the French were not able to stir. There
were several men slain of the French, and one or two of the Spaniards,
and one Englishman by a bullet. Which is very observable, the French
were at least four to one in number, and had near 100 case of pistols
among them, and the Spaniards had not one gun among them; which is for
their honour for ever, and the others’ disgrace. So, having been very
much daubed with dirt, I got a coach, and home where I vexed my wife in
telling of her this story, and pleading for the Spaniards against the
French. So ends this month; myself and family in good condition
of health, but my head full of my Lord’s and my own and the office
business; where we are now very busy about the business of sending
forces to Tangier,

     [This place so often mentioned, was first given up to the English
     fleet under Lord Sandwich, by the Portuguese, January 30th, 1662;
     and Lord Peterborough left governor, with a garrison.  The greatest
     pains were    afterwards taken to preserve the fortress, and a fine
     mole was constructed at a vast expense, to improve the harbour.  At
     length, after immense sums of money had been wasted there, the House
     of Commons expressed a dislike to the management of the garrison,
     which they suspected to be a nursery for a popish army, and seemed
     disinclined to maintain it any longer.  The king consequently, in