12th. At the office all the morning. Dined at home alone. So abroad with
Sir W. Pen. My wife and I to “Bartholomew Fayre,” with puppets which I
had seen once before, and Ate play without puppets often, but though I
love the play as much as ever I did, yet I do not like the puppets at
all, but think it to be a lessening to it. Thence to the Greyhound in
Fleet Street, and there drank some raspberry sack and eat some sasages,
and so home very merry. This day Holmes come to town; and we do expect
hourly to hear what usage he hath from the Duke and the King about
this late business of letting the Swedish Embassador go by him without
striking his flag.

     [And that, too, in the river Thames itself.  The right of obliging
     ships of all nations to lower topsails, and strike their flag to the
     English, whilst in the British seas, and even on the French coasts,
     had, up to this time, been rigidly enforced.  When Sully was sent by
     Henry IV., in 1603, to congratulate James I. on his accession, and
     in a ship commanded by a vice-admiral of France, he was fired upon
     by the English Admiral Mansel, for daring to hoist the flag of
     France in the presence of that of England, although within sight of
     Calais.  The French flag was lowered, and all Sully’s remonstrances
     could obtain no redress for the alleged injury.  According to Rugge,
     Holmes had insisted upon the Swede’s lowering his flag, and had even
     fired a shot to enforce the observance of the usual tribute of
     respect, but the ambassador sent his secretary and another gentleman
     on board the English frigate, to assure the captain, upon the word
     and honour of an ambassador, that the king, by a verbal order, had
     given him leave and a dispensation in that particular, and upon this
     false representation he was allowed to proceed on his voyage without
     further question.  This want of caution, and disobedience of orders,
     fell heavily on Holmes, who was imprisoned for two months, and not
     re-appointed to the same ship.  Brahe afterwards made a proper
     submission for the fault he had committed, at his own court.  His
     conduct reminds us of Sir Henry Wotton’s definition of an
     ambassador--that he is an honest man sent to lie abroad for the good
     of his country.  A pun upon the term lieger--ambassador.--B.]