10th. In the morning to see the Dockhouses. First, Mr. Pett’s, the
builder, and there was very kindly received, and among other things he
did offer my Lady Batten a parrot, the best I ever saw, that knew Mingo
so soon as it saw him, having been bred formerly in the house with them;
but for talking and singing I never heard the like. My Lady did accept
of it: Then to see Commissioner Pett’s house, he and his family being
absent, and here I wondered how my Lady Batten walked up and down with
envious looks to see how neat and rich everything is (and indeed both
the house and garden is most handsome), saying that she would get it,
for it belonged formerly to the Surveyor of the Navy. Then on board the
Prince, now in the dock, and indeed it has one and no more rich cabins
for carved work, but no gold in her. After that back home, and there eat
a little dinner. Then to Rochester, and there saw the Cathedrall, which
is now fitting for use, and the organ then a-tuning. Then away thence,
observing the great doors of the church, which, they say, was covered
with the skins of the Danes,

     [Traditions similar to that at Rochester, here alluded to, are to be
     found in other places in England.  Sir Harry Englefield, in a
     communication made to the Society of Antiquaries, July 2nd, 1789,
     called attention to the curious popular tale preserved in the
     village of Hadstock, Essex, that the door of the church had been
     covered with the skin of a Danish pirate, who had plundered the
     church.  At Worcester, likewise, it was asserted that the north
     doors of the cathedral had been covered with the skin of a person
     who had sacrilegiously robbed the high altar.  The date of these
     doors appears to be the latter part of the fourteenth century, the
     north porch having been built about 1385.  Dart, in his “History of
     the Abbey Church of St. Peter’s, Westminster,” 1723 (vol. i., book
     ii., p. 64), relates a like tradition then preserved in reference to
     a door, one of three which closed off a chamber from the south
     transept--namely, a certain building once known as the Chapel of
     Henry VIII., and used as a “Revestry.”  This chamber, he states, “is
     inclosed with three doors, the inner cancellated, the middle, which
     is very thick, lined with skins like parchment, and driven full of
     nails.  These skins, they by tradition tell us, were some skins of
     the Danes, tann’d and given here as a memorial of our delivery from
     them.”  Portions of this supposed human skin were examined under the
     microscope by the late Mr. John Quekett of the Hunterian Museum, who
     ascertained, beyond question, that in each of the cases the skin was
     human.  From a communication by the late Mr. Albert Way, F.S.A., to
     the late Lord Braybrooke.]

and also had much mirth at a tomb, on which was “Come sweet Jesu,” and
I read “Come sweet Mall,” &c., at which Captain Pett and I had good
laughter. So to the Salutacion tavern, where Mr. Alcock and many of the
town came and entertained us with wine and oysters and other things,
and hither come Sir John Minnes to us, who is come to-day to see “the
Henery,” in which he intends to ride as Vice-Admiral in the narrow seas
all this summer. Here much mirth, but I was a little troubled to stay
too long, because of going to Hempson’s, which afterwards we did, and
found it in all things a most pretty house, and rarely furnished, only
it had a most ill access on all sides to it, which is a greatest fault
that I think can be in a house. Here we had, for my sake, two fiddles,
the one a base viall, on which he that played, played well some lyra
lessons, but both together made the worst musique that ever I heard.
We had a fine collacion, but I took little pleasure in that, for the
illness of the musique and for the intentness of my mind upon Mrs.
Rebecca Allen. After we had done eating, the ladies went to dance, and
among the men we had, I was forced to dance too; and did make an ugly
shift. Mrs. R. Allen danced very well, and seems the best humoured woman
that ever I saw. About 9 o’clock Sir William and my Lady went home, and
we continued dancing an hour or two, and so broke up very pleasant and
merry, and so walked home, I leading Mrs. Rebecca, who seemed, I know
not why, in that and other things, to be desirous of my favours and
would in all things show me respects. Going home, she would needs have
me sing, and I did pretty well and was highly esteemed by them. So to
Captain Allen’s (where we were last night, and heard him play on the
harpsicon, and I find him to be a perfect good musician), and there,
having no mind to leave Mrs. Rebecca, what with talk and singing (her
father and I), Mrs. Turner and I staid there till 2 o’clock in the
morning and was most exceeding merry, and I had the opportunity of
kissing Mrs. Rebecca very often. Among other things Captain Pett was
saying that he thought that he had got his wife with child since I came
thither. Which I took hold of and was merrily asking him what he would
take to have it said for my honour that it was of my getting? He merrily
answered that he would if I would promise to be godfather to it if it
did come within the time just, and I said that I would. So that I must
remember to compute it when the time comes.