27th. To Westminster, where at Mr. Montagu’s chamber I heard a Frenchman
play, a friend of Monsieur Eschar’s, upon the guitar, most extreme
well, though at the best methinks it is but a bawble. From thence to
Westminster Hall, where it was expected that the Parliament was to have
been adjourned for two or three months, but something hinders it for a
day or two. In the lobby I spoke with Mr. George Montagu, and advised
about a ship to carry my Lord Hinchingbroke and the rest of the young
gentlemen to France, and they have resolved of going in a hired vessell
from Rye, and not in a man of war. He told me in discourse that my Lord
Chancellor is much envied, and that many great men, such as the Duke of
Buckingham and my Lord of Bristoll, do endeavour to undermine him, and
that he believes it will not be done; for that the King (though he loves
him not in the way of a companion, as he do these young gallants that
can answer him in his pleasures), yet cannot be without him, for his
policy and service. From thence to the Wardrobe, where my wife met me,
it being my Lord of Sandwich’s birthday, and so we had many friends
here, Mr. Townsend and his wife, and Captain Ferrers lady and Captain
Isham, and were very merry, and had a good venison pasty. Mr. Pargiter,
the merchant, was with us also. After dinner Mr. Townsend was called
upon by Captain Cooke: so we three went to a tavern hard by, and there
he did give us a song or two; and without doubt he hath the best manner
of singing in the world. Back to my wife, and with my Lady Jem. and Pall
by water through bridge, and showed them the ships with great pleasure,
and then took them to my house to show it them (my Lady their mother
having been lately all alone to see it and my wife, in my absence in the
country), and we treated them well, and were very merry. Then back again
through bridge, and set them safe at home, and so my wife and I by coach
home again, and after writing a letter to my father at Brampton, who,
poor man, is there all alone, and I have not heard from him since my
coming from him, which troubles me. To bed.