3d (Lord’s day). This day I first begun to go forth in my coat and
sword, as the manner now among gentlemen is. To Whitehall. In my way
heard Mr. Thomas Fuller preach at the Savoy upon our forgiving of other
men’s trespasses, shewing among other things that we are to go to law
never to revenge, but only to repayre, which I think a good distinction.
So to White Hall; where I staid to hear the trumpets and kettle-drums,
and then the other drums, which are much cried up, though I think it
dull, vulgar musique. So to Mr. Fox’s, unbid; where I had a good dinner
and special company. Among other discourse, I observed one story, how my
Lord of Northwich, at a public audience before the King of France, made
the Duke of Anjou cry, by making ugly faces as he was stepping to the
King, but undiscovered.

     [This story relates to circumstances which had occurred many years
     previously.  George, Lord Goring, was sent by Charles I. as
     Ambassador Extraordinary to France in 1644, to witness the oath of
     Louis XIV. to the observance of the treaties concluded with England
     by his father, Louis XIII., and his grandfather, Henry IV.  Louis
     XIV. took this oath at Ruel, on July 3rd, 1644, when he was not yet
     six years of age, and when his brother Philippe, then called Duke of
     Anjou, was not four years old.  Shortly after his return home, Lord
     Goring was created, in September, 1644, Earl of Norwich, the title
     by which he is here mentioned.  Philippe, Duke of Anjou, who was
     frightened by the English nobleman’s ugly faces, took the title of
     Duke of Orleans after the death of his uncle, Jean Baptiste Gaston,
     in 1660.  He married his cousin, Henrietta of England.--B.]

And how Sir Phillip Warwick’s’ lady did wonder to have Mr. Darcy’ send
for several dozen bottles of Rhenish wine to her house, not knowing that
the wine was his. Thence to my Lord’s; where I am told how Sir Thomas
Crew’s Pedro, with two of his countrymen more, did last night kill
one soldier of four that quarrelled with them in the street, about 10
o’clock. The other two are taken; but he is now hid at my Lord’s till
night, that he do intend to make his escape away. So up to my Lady, and
sat and talked with her long, and so to Westminster Stairs, and there
took boat to the bridge, and so home, where I met with letters to call
us all up to-morrow morning to Whitehall about office business.