31st. At home and the office all the morning, and at noon comes Luellin
to me, and he and I to the tavern and after that to Bartholomew fair,
and there upon his motion to a pitiful alehouse, where we had a dirty
slut or two come up that were whores, but my very heart went against
them, so that I took no pleasure but a great deal of trouble in being
there and getting from thence for fear of being seen. From hence he and
I walked towards Ludgate and parted. I back again to the fair all alone,
and there met with my Ladies Jemimah and Paulina, with Mr. Pickering and
Madamoiselle, at seeing the monkeys dance, which was much to see, when
they could be brought to do so, but it troubled me to sit among such
nasty company. After that with them into Christ’s Hospitall, and there
Mr. Pickering bought them some fairings, and I did give every one of
them a bauble, which was the little globes of glass with things hanging
in them, which pleased the ladies very well. After that home with them
in their coach, and there was called up to my Lady, and she would have
me stay to talk with her, which I did I think a full hour. And the poor
lady did with so much innocency tell me how Mrs. Crispe had told her
that she did intend, by means of a lady that lies at her house, to get
the King to be godfather to the young lady that she is in childbed now
of; but to see in what a manner my Lady told it me, protesting that she
sweat in the very telling of it, was the greatest pleasure to me in the
world to see the simplicity and harmlessness of a lady. Then down to
supper with the ladies, and so home, Mr. Moore (as he and I cannot
easily part) leading me as far as Fenchurch Street to the Mitre, where
we drank a glass of wine and so parted, and I home and to bed.

Thus ends the month. My maid Jane newly gone, and Pall left now to do
all the work till another maid comes, which shall not be till she goes
away into the country with my mother. Myself and wife in good health. My
Lord Sandwich in the Straits and newly recovered of a great sickness at
Alicante. My father gone to settle at Brampton, and myself under much
business and trouble for to settle things in the estate to our content.
But what is worst, I find myself lately too much given to seeing of
plays, and expense, and pleasure, which makes me forget my business,
which I must labour to amend. No money comes in, so that I have been
forced to borrow a great deal for my own expenses, and to furnish my
father, to leave things in order. I have some trouble about my brother
Tom, who is now left to keep my father’s trade, in which I have great
fears that he will miscarry for want of brains and care. At Court things
are in very ill condition, there being so much emulacion, poverty, and
the vices of drinking, swearing, and loose amours, that I know not what
will be the end of it, but confusion. And the Clergy so high, that all
people that I meet with do protest against their practice. In short, I
see no content or satisfaction any where, in any one sort of people. The
Benevolence

     [A voluntary contribution made by the subjects to their sovereign.
     Upon this occasion the clergy alone gave L33,743: See May 31st,