11th. Early to my cozen Thomas Trice to discourse about our affairs,
and he did make demand of the L200 and the interest thereof. But for
the L200 I did agree to pay him, but for the other I did desire to be
advised. So from him to Dr. Williams, who did carry me into his garden,
where he hath abundance of grapes; and did show me how a dog that he
hath do kill all the cats that come thither to kill his pigeons, and
do afterwards bury them; and do it with so much care that they shall be
quite covered; that if but the tip of the tail hangs out he will take
up the cat again, and dig the hole deeper. Which is very strange; and he
tells me that he do believe that he hath killed above 100 cats. After
he was ready we went up and down to inquire about my affairs and then
parted, and to the Wardrobe, and there took Mr. Moore to Tom Trice, who
promised to let Mr. Moore have copies of the bond and my aunt’s deed
of gift, and so I took him home to my house to dinner, where I found my
wife’s brother, Balty, as fine as hands could make him, and his servant,
a Frenchman, to wait on him, and come to have my wife to visit a young
lady which he is a servant to, and have hope to trepan and get for his
wife. I did give way for my wife to go with him, and so after dinner
they went, and Mr. Moore and I out again, he about his business and I
to Dr. Williams: to talk with him again, and he and I walking through
Lincoln’s Fields observed at the Opera a new play, “Twelfth Night”

     [Pepys seldom liked any play of Shakespeare’s, and he sadly
     blundered when he supposed “Twelfth Night” was a new play.]

was acted there, and the King there; so I, against my own mind and
resolution, could not forbear to go in, which did make the play seem a
burthen to me, and I took no pleasure at all in it; and so after it
was done went home with my mind troubled for my going thither, after my
swearing to my wife that I would never go to a play without her. So
that what with this and things going so cross to me as to matters of my
uncle’s estate, makes me very much troubled in my mind, and so to bed.
My wife was with her brother to see his mistress today, and says she is
young, rich, and handsome, but not likely for him to get.