7th. This morning, news was brought to me to my bedside, that there had
been a great stir in the City this night by the Fanatiques, who had been
up and killed six or seven men, but all are fled.

     [“A great rising in the city of the Fifth-monarchy men, which did
     very much disturb the peace and liberty of the people, so that all
     the train-bands arose in arms, both in London and Westminster, as
     likewise all the king’s guards; and most of the noblemen mounted,
     and put all their servants on coach horses, for the defence of his
     Majesty, and the peace of his kingdom.”--Rugge’s Diurnal.  The
     notorious Thomas Venner, the Fifth-monarchy man, a cooper and
     preacher to a conventicle in Swan Alley, Coleman Street, with a
     small following (about fifty in number) took arms on the 6th January
     for the avowed purpose of establishing the Millennium.  He was a
     violent enthusiast, and persuaded his followers that they were
     invulnerable.  After exciting much alarm in the City, and
     skirmishing with the Trained Bands, they marched to Caen Wood.  They
     were driven out by a party of guards, but again entered the City,
     where they were overpowered by the Trained Bands.  The men were
     brought to trial and condemned; four, however, were acquitted and
     two reprieved.  The execution of some of these men is mentioned by
     Pepys under date January 19th and 21st.  “A Relation of the
     Arraignment and Trial of those who made the late Rebellious
     Insurrections in London, 1661,” is reprinted in “Somers Tracts,”
      vol. vii.  (1812), p. 469.]

My Lord Mayor and the whole City had been in arms, above 40,000. To the
office, and after that to dinner, where my brother Tom came and dined
with me, and after dinner (leaving 12d. with the servants to buy a cake
with at night, this day being kept as Twelfth day) Tom and I and my wife
to the Theatre, and there saw “The Silent Woman.” The first time that
ever I did see it, and it is an excellent play. Among other things here,
Kinaston, the boy; had the good turn to appear in three shapes: first,
as a poor woman in ordinary clothes, to please Morose; then in fine
clothes, as a gallant, and in them was clearly the prettiest woman in
the whole house, and lastly, as a man; and then likewise did appear
the handsomest man in the house. From thence by link to my cozen
Stradwick’s, where my father and we and Dr. Pepys, Scott, and his wife,
and one Mr. Ward and his; and after a good supper, we had an excellent
cake, where the mark for the Queen was cut, and so there was two queens,
my wife and Mrs. Ward; and the King being lost, they chose the Doctor
to be King, so we made him send for some wine, and then home, and in
our way home we were in many places strictly examined, more than in
the worst of times, there being great fears of these Fanatiques rising
again: for the present I do not hear that any of them are taken. Home,
it being a clear moonshine and after 12 o’clock at night. Being come
home we found that my people had been very merry, and my wife tells me
afterwards that she had heard that they had got young Davis and some
other neighbours with them to be merry, but no harm.