9th. To the office, where word is brought me by a son-in-law of Mr.
Pierces; the purser, that his father is a dying and that he desires that
I would come to him before he dies. So I rose from the table and went,
where I found him not so ill as I thought that he had been ill. So I did
promise to be a friend to his wife and family if he should die, which
was all he desired of me, but I do believe he will recover. Back again
to the office, where I found Sir G. Carteret had a day or two ago
invited some of the officers to dinner to-day at Deptford. So at noon,
when I heard that he was a-coming, I went out, because I would see
whether he would send to me or no to go with them; but he did not, which
do a little trouble me till I see how it comes to pass. Although in
other things I am glad of it because of my going again to-day to the
Privy Seal. I dined at home, and having dined news is brought by Mr.
Hater that his wife is now falling into labour, so he is come for my
wife, who presently went with him. I to White Hall, where, after four
o’clock, comes my Lord Privy Seal, and so we went up to his chamber over
the gate at White Hall, where he asked me what deputacon I had from My
Lord. I told him none; but that I am sworn my Lord’s deputy by both of
the Secretarys, which did satisfy him. So he caused Mr. Moore to read
over all the bills as is the manner, and all ended very well. So that
I see the Lyon is not so fierce as he is painted. That being done Mons.
Eschar (who all this afternoon had been waiting at the Privy Seal
for the Warrant for L5,000 for my Lord of Sandwich’s preparation for
Portugal) and I took some wine with us and went to visit la belle
Pierce, who we find very big with child, and a pretty lady, one Mrs.
Clifford, with her, where we staid and were extraordinary merry. From
thence I took coach to my father’s, where I found him come home this day
from Brampton (as I expected) very well, and after some discourse about
business and it being very late I took coach again home, where I hear
by my wife that Mrs. Hater is not yet delivered, but continues in her
pains. So to bed.