20th. Here comes my boy to tell me that the Duke of York had sent for
all the principal officers, &c., to come to him to-day. So I went by
water to Mr. Coventry’s, and there staid and talked a good while with
him till all the rest come. We went up and saw the Duke dress himself,
and in his night habitt he is a very plain man. Then he sent us to his
closett, where we saw among other things two very fine chests, covered
with gold and Indian varnish, given him by the East Indy Company of
Holland. The Duke comes; and after he had told us that the fleet was
designed for Algier (which was kept from us till now), we did advise
about many things as to the fitting of the fleet, and so went away. And
from thence to the Privy Seal, where little to do, and after that took
Mr. Creed and Moore and gave them their morning draught, and after that
to my Lord’s, where Sir W. Pen came to me, and dined with my Lord. After
dinner he and others that dined there went away, and then my Lord looked
upon his pages’ and footmen’s liverys, which are come home to-day, and
will be handsome, though not gaudy. Then with my Lady and my Lady Wright
to White Hall; and in the Banqueting-house saw the King create my Lord
Chancellor and several others, Earls, and Mr. Crew and several others,
Barons: the first being led up by Heralds and five old Earls to the
King, and there the patent is read, and the King puts on his vest, and
sword, and coronet, and gives him the patent. And then he kisseth the
King’s hand, and rises and stands covered before the king. And the same
for the Barons, only he is led up but by three of the old Barons, and
are girt with swords before they go to the King. That being done (which
was very pleasant to see their habits), I carried my Lady back, and I
found my Lord angry, for that his page had let my Lord’s new beaver
be changed for an old hat; then I went away, and with Mr. Creed to the
Exchange and bought some things, as gloves and bandstrings, &c. So back
to the Cockpitt, and there, by the favour of one Mr. Bowman, he and I
got in, and there saw the King and Duke of York and his Duchess (which
is a plain woman, and like her mother, my Lady Chancellor). And so saw
“The Humersome Lieutenant” acted before the King, but not very well
done.

But my pleasure was great to see the manner of it, and so many great
beauties, but above all Mrs. Palmer, with whom the King do discover a
great deal of familiarity. So Mr. Creed and I (the play being done)
went to Mrs. Harper’s, and there sat and drank, it being about twelve at
night. The ways being now so dirty, and stopped up with the rayles which
are this day set up in the streets, I would not go home, but went with
him to his lodging at Mr. Ware’s, and there lay all night.