30th (Lord’s day). To church in the morning, and Mr. Mills made a pretty
good sermon. It is a bitter cold frost to-day. Dined alone with my
wife to-day with great content, my house being quite clean from top to
bottom. In the afternoon I to the French church here

     [The French Protestant Church was founded by Edward VI. in the
     church of St. Anthony’s Hospital in Threadneedle Street.  This was
     destroyed in the Great Fire, and rebuilt, but demolished for the
     approaches of the new Royal Exchange.  The church was then removed
     to St. Martin’s-le-Grand, but this was also removed in 1888 to make
     room for the new Post Office buildings.]

in the city, and stood in the aisle all the sermon, with great delight
hearing a very admirable sermon, from a very young man, upon the article
in our creed, in order of catechism, upon the Resurrection. Thence home,
and to visit Sir W. Pen, who continues still bed-rid. Here was Sir W.
Batten and his Lady, and Mrs. Turner, and I very merry, talking of the
confidence of Sir R. Ford’s new-married daughter, though she married so
strangely lately, yet appears at church as brisk as can be, and takes
place of her elder sister, a maid. Thence home and to supper, and then,
cold as it is, to my office, to make up my monthly accounts, and I do
find that, through the fitting of my house this month, I have spent in
that and kitchen L50 this month; so that now I am worth but L660, or
thereabouts. This being done and fitted myself for the Duke to-morrow, I
went home, and to prayers and to bed. This day I first did wear a muffe,
being my wife’s last year’s muffe,

     [The fashion of men wearing muffs appears to have been introduced
     from France in this reign.]

and now I have bought her a new one, this serves me very well. Thus ends
this month; in great frost; myself and family all well, but my mind much
disordered about my uncle’s law business, being now in an order of
being arbitrated between us, which I wish to God it were done. I am
also somewhat uncertain what to think of my going about to take a
woman-servant into my house, in the quality of a woman for my wife. My
wife promises it shall cost me nothing but her meat and wages, and that
it shall not be attended with any other expenses, upon which termes I
admit of it; for that it will, I hope, save me money in having my wife
go abroad on visits and other delights; so that I hope the best, but am
resolved to alter it, if matters prove otherwise than I would have them.
Publique matters in an ill condition of discontent against the height
and vanity of the Court, and their bad payments: but that which troubles
most, is the Clergy, which will never content the City, which is not to
be reconciled to Bishopps: the more the pity that differences must still
be. Dunkirk newly sold, and the money brought over; of which we hope to
get some to pay the Navy: which by Sir J. Lawson’s having dispatched the
business in the Straights, by making peace with Argier,--[The ancient
name for Algiers.]--Tunis, and Tripoli (and so his fleet will also
shortly come home), will now every day grow less, and so the King’s
charge be abated; which God send!