18th. Up very early, and up upon my house to see how work goes on, which
do please me very well. So about seven o’clock took horse and rode to
Bowe, and there staid at the King’s Head, and eat a breakfast of eggs
till Mr. Deane of Woolwich came to me, and he and I rid into Waltham
Forest, and there we saw many trees of the King’s a-hewing; and he
showed me the whole mystery of off square,

     [Off-square is evidently a mistake, in the shorthand MS., for half
     square.]

wherein the King is abused in the timber that he buys, which I shall
with much pleasure be able to correct. After we had been a good while in
the wood, we rode to Illford, and there, while dinner was getting ready,
he and I practised measuring of the tables and other things till I did
understand measuring of timber and board very well. So to dinner and by
and by, being sent for, comes Mr. Cooper, our officer in the Forest, and
did give me an account of things there, and how the country is backward
to come in with their carts. By and by comes one Mr. Marshall, of whom
the King has many carriages for his timber, and they staid and drank
with me, and while I am here, Sir W. Batten passed by in his coach,
homewards from Colchester, where he had been seeing his son-in-law,
Lemon, that lies a-dying, but I would take no notice of him, but let him
go. By and by I got a horseback again and rode to Barking, and there saw
the place where they ship this timber for Woolwich; and so Deane and I
home again, and parted at Bowe, and I home just before a great showre of
rayne, as God would have it. I find Deane a pretty able man, and able to
do the King service; but, I think, more out of envy to the rest of the
officers of the yard, of whom he complains much, than true love, more
than others, to the service. He would fain seem a modest man, and
yet will commend his own work and skill, and vie with other persons,
especially the Petts, but I let him alone to hear all he will say.
Whiled away the evening at my office trying to repeat the rules of
measuring learnt this day, and so to bed with my mind very well pleased
with this day’s work.