29th. Before I went to the office my wife’s brother did come to us, and
we did instruct him to go to Gosnell’s and to see what the true matter
is of her not coming, and whether she do intend to come or no, and so
I to the office; and this morning come Sir G. Carteret to us (being the
first time we have seen him since his coming from France): he tells us,
that the silver which he received for Dunkirk did weigh 120,000 weight.
Here all the morning upon business, and at noon (not going home to
dinner, though word was brought me that Will. Joyce was there, whom I
had not seen at my house nor any where else these three or four months)
with Mr. Coventry by his coach as far as Fleet Street, and there stepped
into Madam Turner’s, where was told I should find my cozen Roger Pepys,
and with him to the Temple, but not having time to do anything I went
towards my Lord Sandwich’s. (In my way went into Captn. Cuttance’s
coach, and with him to my Lord’s.) But the company not being ready I did
slip down to Wilkinson’s, and having not eat any thing to-day did eat
a mutton pie and drank, and so to my Lord’s, where my Lord and Mr.
Coventry, Sir Wm. Darcy, one Mr. Parham (a very knowing and well-spoken
man in this business), with several others, did meet about stating the
business of the fishery, and the manner of the King’s giving of this
L200 to every man that shall set out a new-made English Busse by
the middle of June next. In which business we had many fine pretty
discourses; and I did here see the great pleasure to be had in
discoursing of publique matters with men that are particularly
acquainted with this or that business. Having come to some issue,
wherein a motion of mine was well received, about sending these
invitations from the King to all the fishing-ports in general, with
limiting so many Busses to this, and that port, before we know the
readiness of subscribers, we parted, and I walked home all the way, and
having wrote a letter full of business to my father, in my way calling
upon my cozen Turner and Mr. Calthrop at the Temple, for their consent
to be my arbitrators, which they are willing to. My wife and I to bed
pretty pleasant, for that her brother brings word that Gosnell, which my
wife and I in discourse do pleasantly call our Marmotte, will certainly
come next week without fail, which God grant may be for the best.