30th. We rose, and he about his business, and I to my house to look over
my workmen; but good God! how I do find myself by yesterday’s liberty
hard to be brought to follow business again, but however, I must do it,
considering the great sweet and pleasure and content of mind that I have
had since I did leave drink and plays, and other pleasures, and followed
my business. So to my office, where we sat till noon, and then I to
dinner with Sir W. Pen, and while we were at it coming my wife to the
office, and so I sent for her up, and after dinner we took coach and
to the Duke’s playhouse, where we saw “The Duchess of Malfy” well
performed, but Betterton and Ianthe to admiration. That being done,
home again, by coach, and my wife’s chamber got ready for her to lie in
to-night, but my business did call me to my office, so that staying late
I did not lie with her at home, but at my lodgings. Strange to see how
easily my mind do revert to its former practice of loving plays and
wine, having given myself a liberty to them but these two days; but this
night I have again bound myself to Christmas next, in which I desire
God to bless me and preserve me, for under God I find it to be the best
course that ever I could take to bring myself to mind my business.
I have also made up this evening my monthly ballance, and find that,
notwithstanding the loss of L30 to be paid to the loyall and necessitous
cavaliers by act of Parliament,

     [Two acts were passed in 1662 for this purpose, viz., 13 and 14 Car.
     II. cap. 8: “An act for distribution of threescore thousand pounds
     amongst the truly loyal and indigent commission officers, and for
     assessing of offices and distributing the monies thereby raised for
     their further supply;” and cap.  9, “An act for the relief of poor
     and maimed officers and soldiers who have faithfully served his
     Majesty and his royal father in the late wars.”]

yet I am worth about L680, for which the Lord God be praised. My
condition at present is this:--I have long been building, and my house
to my great content is now almost done. But yet not so but that I shall
have dirt, which troubles me too, for my wife has been in the country at
Brampton these two months, and is now come home a week or two before
the house is ready for her. My mind is somewhat troubled about my best
chamber, which I question whether I shall be able to keep or no. I am
also troubled for the journey which I must needs take suddenly to
the Court at Brampton, but most of all for that I am not provided to
understand my business, having not minded it a great while, and at the
best shall be able but to make a bad matter of it, but God, I hope, will
guide all to the best, and I am resolved to-morrow to fall hard to it.
I pray God help me therein, for my father and mother and all our
well-doings do depend upon my care therein. My Lord Sandwich has lately
been in the country, and very civil to my wife, and hath himself spent
some pains in drawing a plot of some alterations in our house there,
which I shall follow as I get money. As for the office, my late industry
hath been such, as I am become as high in reputation as any man there,
and good hold I have of Mr. Coventry and Sir G. Carteret, which I am
resolved, and it is necessary for me, to maintain by all fair means.
Things are all quiett, but the King poor, and no hopes almost of his
being otherwise, by which things will go to rack, especially in the
Navy. The late outing of the Presbyterian clergy by their not renouncing
the Covenant as the Act of Parliament commands, is the greatest piece
of state now in discourse. But for ought I see they are gone out very
peaceably, and the people not so much concerned therein as was expected.
My brother Tom is gone out of town this day, to make a second journey to
his mistress at Banbury, of which I have good expectations, and pray God
to bless him therein. My mind, I hope, is settled to follow my business
again, for I find that two days’ neglect of business do give more
discontent in mind than ten times the pleasure thereof can repair again,
be it what it will.