3rd. Up betimes, but now the days begin to shorten, and so whereas I
used to rise by four o’clock, it is not broad daylight now till after
five o’clock, so that it is after five before I do rise. To my office,
and about 8 o’clock I went over to Redriffe, and walked to Deptford,
where I found Mr. Coventry and Sir W. Pen beginning the pay, it being my
desire to be there to-day because it is the first pay that Mr. Coventry
has been at, and I would be thought to be as much with Mr. Coventry as
I can. Here we staid till noon, and by that time paid off the Breda, and
then to dinner at the tavern, where I have obtained that our commons is
not so large as they used to be, which I am glad to see. After dinner by
water to the office, and there we met and sold the Weymouth, Successe,
and Fellowship hulkes, where pleasant to see how backward men are at
first to bid; and yet when the candle is going out, how they bawl and
dispute afterwards who bid the most first. And here I observed one man
cunninger than the rest that was sure to bid the last man, and to carry
it; and inquiring the reason, he told me that just as the flame goes
out the smoke descends, which is a thing I never observed before, and by
that he do know the instant when to bid last, which is very pretty. In
our discourse in the boat Mr. Coventry told us how the Fanatiques and
the Presbyters, that did intend to rise about this time, did choose this
day as the most auspicious to them in their endeavours against monarchy:
it being fatal twice to the King, and the day of Oliver’s death.

     [Cromwell had considered the 3rd of September as the most fortunate
     day of his life, on account of his victories at Dunbar and
     Worcester.  It was also remarkable for the great storm that occurred
     at the time of his death; and as being the day on which the Fire of
     London, in 1666, burnt with the greatest fury.--B.]

But, blessed be God! all is likely to be quiet, I hope. After the sale I
walked to my brother’s, in my way meeting with Dr. Fairbrother, of
whom I enquired what news in Church matters. He tells me, what I heard
confirmed since, that it was fully resolved by the King’s new Council
that an indulgence should be granted the Presbyters; but upon the Bishop
of London’s speech

     [Gilbert Sheldon, born July 19th, 1598; Fellow of All Souls, Oxford,