December 1st. Up and by coach with Sir John Minnes and Sir W. Batten to
White Hall to the Duke’s chamber, where, as is usual, my Lord Sandwich
and all of us, after his being ready, to his closett, and there
discoursed of matters of the Navy, and here Mr. Coventry did do me
the great kindness to take notice to the Duke of my pains in making a
collection of all contracts about masts, which have been of great use to
us. Thence I to my Lord Sandwich’s, to Mr. Moore, to talk a little about
business; and then over the Parke (where I first in my life, it being a
great frost, did see people sliding with their skeates,

     [Iron skates appear to have been introduced by the Dutch, as the
     name certainly was; but we learn from Fitzstephen that bone skates
     (although not so called) were used in London in the twelfth
     century.]

which is a very pretty art), to Mr. Coventry’s chamber to St. James’s,
where we all met to a venison pasty, and were very merry, Major Norwood
being with us, whom they did play upon for his surrendering of Dunkirk.
Here we staid till three or four o’clock; and so to the Council Chamber,
where there met the Duke of York, Prince Rupert, Duke of Albemarle, my
Lord Sandwich, Sir Win. Compton, Mr. Coventry, Sir J. Minnes, Sir R.
Ford, Sir W. Rider, myself, and Captain Cuttance, as Commissioners for
Tangier. And after our Commission was read by Mr. Creed, who I perceive
is to be our Secretary, we did fall to discourse of matters: as, first,
the supplying them forthwith with victualls; then the reducing it to
make way for the money, which upon their reduction is to go to the
building of the Mole; and so to other matters, ordered as against
next meeting. This done we broke up, and I to the Cockpitt, with much
crowding and waiting, where I saw “The Valiant Cidd”--[Translated from
the “Cid” of Corneille]--acted, a play I have read with great delight,
but is a most dull thing acted, which I never understood before, there
being no pleasure in it, though done by Betterton and by Ianthe, And
another fine wench that is come in the room of Roxalana nor did the King
or queen once smile all the whole play, nor any of the company seem to
take any pleasure but what was in the greatness and gallantry of the
company. Thence to my Lord’s, and Mr. Moore being in bed I staid not,
but with a link walked home and got thither by 12 o’clock, knocked up my
boy, and put myself to bed.