29th. At home all the morning. At noon to the Wardrobe, and dined with
my Lady, and after dinner staid long talking with her; then homeward,
and in Lumbard Street was called out of a window by Alderman Backwell,
where I went, and saluted his lady, a very pretty woman. Here was Mr.
Creed, and it seems they have been under some disorder in fear of a fire
at the next door, and had been removing their goods, but the fire was
over before I came. Thence home, and with my wife and the two maids, and
the boy, took boat and to Foxhall,

     [Foxhall, Faukeshall, or Vauxhall, a manor in Surrey, properly
     Fulke’s.  Hall, and so called from Fulke de Breaute, the notorious
     mercenary follower of King John.  The manor house was afterwards
     known as Copped or Copt Hall.  Sir Samuel Morland obtained a lease
     of the place, and King Charles made him Master of Mechanics, and
     here “he (Morland), anno 1667, built a fine room,” says Aubrey, “the
     inside all of looking-glass and fountains, very pleasant to behold.”
      The gardens were formed about 1661, and originally called the “New
     Spring Gardens,” to distinguish them from the “Old Spring Gardens”
      at Charing Cross, but according to the present description by Pepys
     there was both an Old and a New Spring Garden at Vauxhall.
     Balthazar Monconys, who visited England early in the reign of
     Charles II., describes the ‘Jardins Printemps’ at Lambeth as having
     lawns and gravel walks, dividing squares of twenty or thirty yards
     enclosed with hedges of gooseberry trees, within which were planted
     roses.]

where I had not been a great while. To the Old Spring Garden, and there
walked long, and the wenches gathered pinks. Here we staid, and seeing
that we could not have anything to eat, but very dear, and with long
stay, we went forth again without any notice taken of us, and so we
might have done if we had had anything. Thence to the New one, where I
never was before, which much exceeds the other; and here we also walked,
and the boy crept through the hedge and gathered abundance of roses,
and, after a long walk, passed out of doors as we did in the other
place, and here we had cakes and powdered beef--[salt beef]--and ale,
and so home again by water with much pleasure. This day, being the
King’s birth-day, was very solemnly observed; and the more, for that
the Queen this day comes to Hampton Court. In the evening, bonfires were
made, but nothing to the great number that was heretofore at the burning
of the Rump. So to bed.