7th. Up and being by appointment called upon by Mr. Lee, he and I to the
Tower, to make our third attempt upon the cellar. And now privately the
woman, Barkestead’s great confident, is brought, who do positively say
that this is the place which he did say the money was hid in, and where
he and she did put up the L50,000

     [Thus in the MS., although the amount was first stated as L7,000
     (see October 30th, 1662)]

in butter firkins; and the very day that he went out of England did
say that neither he nor his would be the better for that money, and
therefore wishing that she and hers might. And so left us, and we full
of hope did resolve to dig all over the cellar, which by seven o’clock
at night we performed. At noon we sent for a dinner, and upon the head
of a barrel dined very merrily, and to work again. Between times, Mr.
Lee, who had been much in Spain, did tell me pretty stories of the
customs and other things, as I asked him, of the country, to my great
content. But at last we saw we were mistaken; and after digging the
cellar quite through, and removing the barrels from one side to
the other, we were forced to pay our porters, and give over our
expectations, though I do believe there must be money hid somewhere by
him, or else he did delude this woman in hopes to oblige her to further
serving him, which I am apt to believe. Thence by coach to White Hall,
and at my Lord’s lodgings did write a letter, he not being within, to
tell him how things went, and so away again, only hearing that Mrs.
Sarah is married, I did go up stairs again and joy her and kiss her, she
owning of it; and it seems it is to a cook. I am glad she is disposed
of, for she grows old, and is very painfull,--[painstaking]--and one
I have reason to wish well for her old service to me. Then to my
brother’s, where my wife, by my order, is tonight to stay a night or two
while my house is made clean, and thence home, where I am angry to see,
instead of the house made in part clean, all the pewter goods and other
things are brought up to scouring, which makes the house ten times
worse, at which I was very much displeased, but cannot help it. So to my
office to set down my journal, and so home and to bed.