7th. By water to Whitehall and thence to Westminster, and staid at the
Parliament-door long to speak with Mr. Coventry, which vexed me. Thence
to the Lords’ House, and stood within the House, while the Bishops and
Lords did stay till the Chancellor’s coming, and then we were put out,
and they to prayers. There comes a Bishop; and while he was rigging
himself, he bid his man listen at the door, whereabout in the prayers
they were but the man told him something, but could not tell whereabouts
it was in the prayers, nor the Bishop neither, but laughed at the
conceit; so went in: but, God forgive me! I did tell it by and by to
people, and did say that the man said that they were about something of
saving their souls, but could not tell whereabouts in the prayers that
was. I sent in a note to my Lord Privy Seal, and he came out to me;
and I desired he would make another deputy for me, because of my great
business of the Navy this month; but he told me he could not do it
without the King’s consent, which vexed me. So to Dr. Castle’s, and
there did get a promise from his clerk that his master should officiate
for me to-morrow. Thence by water to Tom’s, and there with my wife took
coach and to the old Exchange, where having bought six large Holland
bands, I sent her home, and myself found out my uncle Wight and Mr.
Rawlinson, and with them went to the tatter’s house to dinner, and there
had a good dinner of cold meat and good wine, but was troubled in my
head after the little wine I drank, and so home to my office, and there
did promise to drink no more wine but one glass a meal till Whitsuntide
next upon any score. Mrs. Bowyer and her daughters being at my house I
forbore to go to them, having business and my head disturbed, but staid
at my office till night, and then to walk upon the leads with my wife,
and so to my chamber and thence to bed. The great talk is, that the
Spaniards and the Hollanders do intend to set upon the Portuguese by
sea, at Lisbon, as soon as our fleet is come away; and by that means our
fleet is not likely to come yet these two months or three; which I hope
is not true.