8th. Up and by water to my Lord Sandwich’s, and was with him a good
while in his chamber, and among other things to my extraordinary joy,
he did tell me how much I was beholding to the Duke of York, who did
yesterday of his own accord tell him that he did thank him for one
person brought into the Navy, naming myself, and much more to my
commendation, which is the greatest comfort and encouragement that
ever I had in my life, and do owe it all to Mr. Coventry’s goodness and
ingenuity. I was glad above measure of this. Thence to Mr. Moore, who, I
hope, is better than he was, and so home and dined at home, and all the
afternoon busy at my office, and at night by coach to my Lord’s again,
thinking to speak with him, but he is at White Hall with the King,
before whom the puppet plays I saw this summer in Covent-garden are
acted this night. Hither this night my scallop,

     [A lace band, the edges of which were indented with segments of
     circles, so as to resemble a scallop shell.  The word “scallop” was
     used till recently for a part of a lady’s dress embroidered and cut
     to resemble a scallop shell.]

bought and got made by Captain Ferrers’ lady, is sent, and I brought it
home, a very neat one. It cost me about L3, and L3 more I have given him
to buy me another. I do find myself much bound to go handsome, which I
shall do in linen, and so the other things may be all the plainer. Here
I staid playing some new tunes to parts with Wm. Howe, and, my Lord not
coming home, I came home late on foot, my boy carrying a link, and so
eat a bit and to bed, my head full of ordering of businesses against
my journey to-morrow, that there may be nothing done to my wrong in
my absence. This day Sir W. Pen did speak to me from Sir J. Minnes to
desire my best chamber of me, and my great joy is that I perceive he do
not stand upon his right, which I was much afraid of, and so I hope I
shall do well enough with him for it, for I will not part with it by
fair means, though I contrive to let him have another room for it.