November 1st. Up and after a little while with my workmen I went to
my office, and then to our sitting all the morning. At noon with Mr.
Creede, whom I found at my house, to the Trinity House, to a great
dinner there, by invitacion, and much company. It seems one Captain
Evans makes his Elder Brother’s dinner to-day. Among other discourses
one Mr. Oudant, secretary to the late Princesse of Orange, did discourse
of the convenience as to keeping the highways from being deep, by their
horses, in Holland (and Flanders where the ground is as miry as ours
is), going in their carts and, waggons as ours in coaches, wishing the
same here as an expedient to make the ways better, and I think there
is something in it, where there is breadth enough. Thence to my office,
sent for to meet Mr. Leigh again; from Sir H. Bennet. And he and I, with
Wade and his intelligencer and labourers, to the Tower cellars, to make
one tryall more; where we staid two or three hours digging, and dug
a great deal all under the arches, as it was now most confidently
directed, and so seriously, and upon pretended good grounds, that I
myself did truly expect to speed; but we missed of all: and so we went
away the second time like fools. And to our office, whither, a coach
being come, Mr. Leigh goes home to Whitehall; and I by appointment to
the Dolphin Tavern, to meet Wade and the other, Captn. Evett, who now
do tell me plainly, that he that do put him upon this is one that had
it from Barkestead’s own mouth, and was advised with by him, just before
the King’s coming in, how to get it out, and had all the signs told
him how and where it lay, and had always been the great confident of
Barkestead even to the trusting him with his life and all he had. So
that he did much convince me that there is good ground for what we go
about. But I fear it may be that he did find some conveyance of it away,
without the help of this man, before he died. But he is resolved to go
to the party once more, and then to determine what we shall do further.
So we parted, and I to my office, where after sending away my letters
to the post I do hear that Sir J. Minnes is resolved to turn part of
our entry into a room and to divide the back yard between Sir W. Pen and
him, which though I do not see how it will annoy me much particularly,
yet it do trouble me a little for fear it should, but I do not see how
it can well unless in his desiring my coming to my back stairs, but for
that I shall do as well as himself or Sir W. Pen, who is most concerned
to look after it.