10,000 barges and boats, I think, for we could see no water for them,
nor discern the King nor Queen. And so they landed at White Hall Bridge,
and the great guns on the other side went off: But that which pleased me
best was, that my Lady Castlemaine stood over against us upon a piece of
White Hall, where I glutted myself with looking on her. But methought it
was strange to see her Lord and her upon the same place walking up and
down without taking notice one of another, only at first entry he put
off his hat, and she made him a very civil salute, but afterwards took
no notice one of another; but both of them now and then would take their
child, which the nurse held in her armes, and dandle it. One thing more;
there happened a scaffold below to fall, and we feared some hurt, but
there was none, but she of all the great ladies only run down among the
common rabble to see what hurt was done, and did take care of a child
that received some little hurt, which methought was so noble. Anon there
came one there booted and spurred that she talked long with. And by and
by, she being in her hair, she put on his hat, which was but an ordinary
one, to keep the wind off. But methinks it became her mightily, as every
thing else do. The show being over, I went away, not weary with looking
on her, and to my Lord’s lodgings, where my brother Tom and Dr. Thomas
Pepys were to speak with me. So I walked with them in the garden, and
was very angry with them both for their going out of town without my
knowledge; but they told me the business, which was to see a gentlewoman
for a wife for Tom, of Mr. Cooke’s providing, worth L500, of good
education, her name Hobell, and lives near Banbury, demands L40 per
annum joynter. Tom likes her, and, they say, had a very good reception,
and that Cooke hath been very serviceable therein, and that she is
committed to old Mr. Young, of the Wardrobe’s, tuition. After I had told
them my mind about their folly in going so unadvisedly, I then begun to
inquire after the business, and so did give no answer as to my opinion
till I have looked farther into it by Mr. Young. By and by, as we were
walking in my Lord’s walk, comes my Lord, and so we broke our discourse
and went in with him, and after I had put them away I went in to my
Lord, and he and I had half an hour’s private discourse about the
discontents of the times, which we concluded would not come to anything
of difference, though the Presbyters would be glad enough of it; but we
do not think religion will so soon cause another war. Then to his own
business. He asked my advice there, whether he should go on to purchase
more land and to borrow money to pay for it, which he is willing to do,
because such a bargain as that of Mr. Buggins’s, of Stukely, will not
be every day to be had, and Brampton is now perfectly granted him by the
King--I mean the reversion of it--after the Queen’s death; and, in the
meantime, he buys it of Sir Peter Ball his present right. Then we fell
to talk of Navy business, and he concludes, as I do, that he needs not
put himself upon any more voyages abroad to spend money, unless a war
comes; and that by keeping his family awhile in the country, he shall be
able to gather money. He is glad of a friendship with Mr. Coventry, and
I put him upon increasing it, which he will do, but he (as Mr. Coventry
do) do much cry against the course of our payments and the Treasurer to
have the whole power in his own hands of doing what he will, but I think
will not meddle in himself. He told me also that in the Commission for
Tangier Mr. Coventry had advised him that Mr. Povy, who intended to be
Treasurer,

     [Thomas Povy, who had held, under Cromwell, a high situation in the
     Office of Plantations, was appointed in July, 1660, Treasurer and
     Receiver-General of the Rents and Revenues of James, Duke of York;
     but his royal master’s affairs falling into confusion, he
     surrendered his patent on the 27th July, 1668, for a consideration
     of L2,000.  He was also First Treasurer for Tangier, which office he
     resigned to Pepys.  Povy, had apartments at Whitehall, besides his
     lodgings in Lincoln’s Inn, and a villa near Hounslow, called the
     Priory, which he had inherited from Justinian Povy, who purchased it
     in 1625.  He was one of the sons of Justinian Povy, Auditor-General
     to Queen Anne of Denmark in 1614, whose father was John Povy,
     citizen and embroiderer of London.]

and it is intended him, may not be of the Commission itself, and my Lord
I think will endeavour to get him to be contented to be left out of the
Commission, and it is a very good rule indeed that the Treasurer in no
office ought to be of the Commission. Here we broke off, and I bid him
good night, and so with much ado, the streets being at nine o’clock at
night crammed with people going home to the city, for all the borders
of the river had been full of people, as the King had come, to a miracle
got to the Palace Yard, and there took boat, and so to the Old Swan, and
so walked home, and to bed very weary.