31st. Lay long in bed, and so up to make up my Journall for these two or
three days past. Then came Anthony Joyce, who duns me for money for the
tallow which he served in lately by my desire, which vexes me, but I
must get it him the next by my promise. By and by to White Hall, hearing
that Sir G. Carteret was come to town, but I could not find him, and
so back to Tom’s, and thence I took my father to my house, and there he
dined with me, discoursing of our businesses with uncle Thomas and T.
Trice. After dinner he departed and I to the office where we met, and
that being done I walked to my Brother’s and the Wardrobe and other
places about business, and so home, and had Sarah to comb my head clean,
which I found so foul with powdering and other troubles, that I am
resolved to try how I can keep my head dry without powder; and I did
also in a suddaine fit cut off all my beard, which I had been a great
while bringing up, only that I may with my pumice-stone do my whole
face, as I now do my chin, and to save time, which I find a very easy
way and gentile. So she also washed my feet in a bath of herbs, and
so to bed. This month ends with very fair weather for a great while
together. My health pretty well, but only wind do now and then torment
me... extremely. The Queen is brought a few days since to Hampton Court;
and all people say of her to be a very fine and handsome lady, and very
discreet; and that the King is pleased enough with her which, I fear,
will put Madam Castlemaine’s nose out of joynt. The Court is wholly now
at Hampton. A peace with Argier is lately made; which is also good news.
My father is lately come to town to see us, and though it has cost and
will cost more money, yet I am pleased with the alteraeons on my house
at Brampton. My Lord Sandwich is lately come with the Queen from sea,
very well and in good repute. Upon an audit of my estate I find myself
worth about L530 ‘de claro’. The Act for Uniformity is lately printed,

     [“An Act for the Uniformity of public prayers and administration of
     sacraments and other rites and ceremonies, and for establishing the
     form of making, ordaining, and consecrating bishops, priests, and
     deacons in the Church of England.”]

which, it is thought, will make mad work among the Presbyterian
ministers. People of all sides are very much discontented; some thinking
themselves used, contrary to promise, too hardly; and the other, that
they are not rewarded so much as they expected by the King. God keep us
all. I have by a late oath obliged myself from wine and plays, of which
I find good effect.