19th (Lord’s day). To church in the morning, where Mr. Mills preached
upon Christ’s being offered up for our sins, and there proving the
equity with what justice God would lay our sins upon his Son, he did
make such a sermon (among other things pleading, from God’s universal
sovereignty over all his creatures, the power he has of commanding what
he would of his Son by the same rule as that he might have made us all,
and the whole world from the beginning to have been in hell, arguing
from the power the potter has over his clay), that I could have wished
he had let it alone; and speaking again, the Father is now so satisfied
by our security for our debt, that we might say at the last day as many
of us as have interest in Christ’s death: Lord, we owe thee nothing, our
debt is paid. We are not beholden to, thee for anything, for thy debt is
paid to thee to the full; which methinks were very bold words. Home to
dinner, and then my wife and I on foot to see Mrs. Turner, who continues
still sick, and thence into the Old Bayly by appointment to speak with
Mrs. Norbury who lies at (it falls out) next door to my uncle Fenner’s;
but as God would have it, we having no desire to be seen by his people,
he having lately married a midwife that is old and ugly, and that hath
already brought home to him a daughter and three children, we were let
in at a back door. And here she offered me the refusall of some lands of
her’s at Brampton, if I have a mind to buy, which I answered her I was
not at present provided to do. She took occasion to talk of her sister
Wight’s making much of the Wights, who for namesake only my uncle do
shew great kindness to, so I fear may do us that are nearer to him a
great deal of wrong, if he should die without children, which I am sorry
for. Thence to my uncle Wight’s, and there we supped and were merry,
though my uncle hath lately lost 200 or 300 at sea, and I am troubled to
hear that the Turks do take more and more of our ships in the Straights,
and that our merchants here in London do daily break, and are still
likely to do so. So home, and I put in at Sir W. Batten’s, where Major
Holmes was, and in our discourse and drinking I did give Sir J. Mennes’
health, which he swore he would not pledge, and called him knave and
coward (upon the business of Holmes with the Swedish ship lately), which
we all and I particularly did desire him to forbear, he being of our
fraternity, which he took in great dudgeon, and I was vexed to hear him
persist in calling him so, though I believe it to be true, but however
he is to blame and I am troubled at it. So home and to prayers, and to
bed.