27th. At my waking, I found the tops of the houses covered with snow,
which is a rare sight, that I have not seen these three years. Up, and
put my people to perfect the cleaning of my house, and so to the office,
where we sat till noon; and then we all went to the next house upon
Tower Hill, to see the coming by of the Russia Embassador; for whose
reception all the City trained-bands do attend in the streets, and the
King’s life-guards, and most of the wealthy citizens in their black
velvet coats, and gold chains (which remain of their gallantry at the
King’s coming in), but they staid so long that we went down again home
to dinner. And after I had dined, I heard they were coming, and so I
walked to the Conduit in the Quarrefowr,

     [In two ordinances of the reign of Edward III., printed in Riley’s
     “Memorials of London” (pp. 300, 389), this is called the “Carfukes,”
      which nearly approaches the name of the “Carfax,” at Oxford, where
     four ways also met.  Pepys’s form of the word is nearer quatre
     voies, the French equivalent of quadrivium.]

at the end of Gracious-street and Cornhill; and there (the spouts
thereof running very near me upon all the people that were under it) I
saw them pretty well go by. I could not see the Embassador in his coach;
but his attendants in their habits and fur caps very handsome, comely
men, and most of them with hawkes upon their fists to present to the
King. But Lord! to see the absurd nature of Englishmen, that cannot
forbear laughing and jeering at every thing that looks strange. So back
and to the office, and there we met and sat till seven o’clock, making
a bargain with Mr. Wood for his masts of New England; and then in Mr.
Coventry’s coach to the Temple, but my cozen Roger Pepys not being at
leisure to speak to me about my business, I presently walked home, and
to my office till very late doing business, and so home, where I found
my house more and more clear and in order, and hope in a day or two now
to be in very good condition there and to my full content. Which God
grant! So to supper and to bed.