11th. Up betimes, and after a little breakfast, and a very poor one,
like our supper, and such as I cannot feed on, because of my she-cozen
Claxton’s gouty hands; and after Roger had carried me up and down his
house and orchards, to show me them, I mounted, and rode to Huntingdon,
and so to Brampton; where I found my father and two brothers, and Mr.
Cooke, my mother and sister. So we are now all together, God knows when
we shall be so again. I walked up and down the house and garden, and
find my father’s alteracions very handsome. But not so but that there
will be cause enough of doing more if ever I should come to live there,
but it is, however, very well for a country being as any little thing in
the country. So to dinner, where there being nothing but a poor breast
of mutton, and that ill-dressed, I was much displeased, there being Mr.
Cooke there, who I invited to come over with my brother thither, and for
whom I was concerned to make much of. I told my father and mother of it,
and so had it very well mended for the time after, as long as I staid,
though I am very glad to see them live so frugally. But now to my
business. I found my uncle Thomas come into the country, and do give out
great words, and forwarns all our people of paying us rent, and gives
out that he will invalidate the Will, it being but conditional, we
paying debts and legacies, which we have not done, but I hope we shall
yet go through well enough. I settled to look over papers, and discourse
of business against the Court till the evening; and then rode to
Hinchingbroke (Will with me), and there to my Lady’s chamber and saw
her, but, it being night, and my head full of business, staid not long,
but drank a cup of ale below, and so home again, and to supper, and to
bed, being not quiet in mind till I speak with Piggott, to see how his
business goes, whose land lies mortgaged to my late uncle, but never
taken up by him, and so I fear the heire at law will do it and that we
cannot, but my design is to supplant him by pretending bonds as well as
a mortgage for the same money, and so as executor have the benefit of
the bonds.