21st (Lord’s day). Got up betimes and walked to St. James’s, and there
to Mr. Coventry, and sat an hour with him, talking of business of the
office with great pleasure, and I do perceive he do speak his whole mind
to me. Thence to the Park, where by appointment I met my brother Tom
and Mr. Cooke, and there spoke about Tom’s business, and to good
satisfaction. The Queen coming by in her coach, going to her chappell
at St. James’s’ (the first time it hath been ready for her), I crowded
after her, and I got up to the room where her closet is; and there stood
and saw the fine altar, ornaments, and the fryers in their habits,
and the priests come in with their fine copes and many other very fine
things. I heard their musique too; which may be good, but it did not
appear so to me, neither as to their manner of singing, nor was it good
concord to my ears, whatever the matter was. The Queene very devout: but
what pleased me best was to see my dear Lady Castlemaine, who, tho’ a
Protestant, did wait upon the Queen to chappell. By and by, after mass
was done, a fryer with his cowl did rise up and preach a sermon in
Portuguese; which I not understanding, did go away, and to the King’s
chappell, but that was done; and so up to the Queen’s presence-chamber,
where she and the King was expected to dine: but she staying at St.
James’s, they were forced to remove the things to the King’s presence
[chamber]; and there he dined alone, and I with Mr. Fox very finely; but
I see I must not make too much of that liberty for my honour sake only,
not but that I am very well received. After dinner to Tom’s, and so
home, and after walking a good while in the garden I went to my uncle
Wight’s, where I found my aunt in mourning and making sad stories for
the loss of her dear sister Nicholls, of which I should have been very
weary but that pretty Mrs. Margaret Wight came in and I was much
pleased with her company, and so all supper did vex my aunt talking
in commendation of the mass which I had been at to-day, but excused it
afterwards that it was only to make mirth. And so after supper broke up
and home, and after putting my notes in order against to-morrow I went
to bed.