6d. But when I came to read it, it is so silly an abuse of the Presbyter
Knight going to the warrs, that I am ashamed of it; and by and by
meeting at Mr. Townsend’s at dinner, I sold it to him for 18d. Here we
dined with many tradesmen that belong to the Wardrobe, but I was weary
soon of their company, and broke up dinner as soon as I could, and away,
with the greatest reluctancy and dispute (two or three times my reason
stopping my sense and I would go back again) within myself, to the
Duke’s house and saw “The Villaine,” which I ought not to do without
my wife, but that my time is now out that I did undertake it for. But,
Lord! to consider how my natural desire is to pleasure, which God be
praised that he has given me the power by my late oaths to curb so well
as I have done, and will do again after two or three plays more. Here I
was better pleased with the play than I was at first, understanding
the design better than I did. Here I saw Gosnell and her sister at a
distance, and could have found it in my heart to have accosted them, but
thought not prudent. But I watched their going out and found that they
came, she, her sister and another woman, alone, without any man, and did
go over the fields a foot. I find that I have an inclination to have her
come again, though it is most against my interest either of profit or
content of mind, other than for their singing. Home on foot, in my way
calling at Mr. Rawlinson’s and drinking only a cup of ale there. He
tells me my uncle has ended his purchase, which cost him L4,500, and how
my uncle do express his trouble that he has with his wife’s relations,
but I understand his great intentions are for the Wights that hang upon
him and by whose advice this estate is bought. Thence home, and found my
wife busy among her pies, but angry for some saucy words that her mayde
Jane has given her, which I will not allow of, and therefore will give
her warning to be gone. As also we are both displeased for some slight
words that Sarah, now at Sir W. Pen’s, hath spoke of us, but it is no
matter. We shall endeavour to joyne the lion’s skin to the fox’s tail.
So to my office alone a while, and then home to my study and supper and
bed. Being also vexed at my boy for his staying playing abroad when
he is sent of errands, so that I have sent him to-night to see whether
their country carrier be in town or no, for I am resolved to keep him no
more.