20th. This morning came Mr. Child to see me, and set me something to my
Theorbo, and by and by come letters from Tangier from my Lord, telling
me how, upon a great defete given to the Portuguese there by the Moors,
he had put in 300 men into the town, and so he is in possession, of
which we are very glad, because now the Spaniard’s designs of hindering
our getting the place are frustrated. I went with the letter inclosed
to my Lord Chancellor to the House of Lords, and did give it him in the
House. And thence to the Wardrobe with my Lady’s, and there could not
stay dinner, but went by promise to Mr. Savill’s, and there sat the
first time for my picture in little, which pleaseth me well. So to the
office till night and then home.

     [“Sunday, Jan.  12.  This morning, the Portuguese, 140 horse in
     Tangier, made a salley into the country for booty, whereof they had
     possessed about 400 cattle, 30 camels, and some horses, and 35 women
     and girls, and being six miles distant from Tangier, were
     intercepted by 100 Moors with harquebusses, who in the first charge
     killed the Aidill with a shot in the head, whereupon the rest of the
     Portuguese ran, and in the pursuit 51 were slain, whereof were 11 of
     the knights, besides the Aidill.  The horses of the 51 were also
     taken by the Moors, and all the booty relieved.

     “Tuesday, Jan. 14.  This morning, Mr. Mules came to me from the
     Governor, for the assistance of some of our men into the castle.

     “Thursday, Jan. 16.  About 80 men out of my own ship, and the
     Princess, went into Tangier, into the lower castle, about four of
     the clock in the afternoon.

     “Friday, Jan. 17.  In the morning, by eight o’clock, the ‘Martyr’
     came in from Cales (Cadiz) with provisions, and about ten a clock I
     sent Sir Richard Stayner, with 120 men, besides officers, to the
     assistance of the Governor, into Tangier.”--Lord Sandwich’s Journal,
     in Kennet’s Register.

     On the 23rd, Lord Sandwich put one hundred more men into Tangier; on
     the 29th and 30th, Lord Peterborough and his garrison arrived from
     England, and received possession from the Portuguese; and, on the