20th. Up early, and to my office, and thence to my Lord Sandwich, whom
I found in bed, and he sent for me in. Among other talk, he do tell me
that he hath put me into commission with a great many great persons in
the business of Tangier, which is a very great honour to me, and may be
of good concernment to me. By and by comes in Mr. Coventry to us, whom
my Lord tells that he is also put into the commission, and that I am
there, of which he said he was glad; and did tell my Lord that I was
indeed the life of this office, and much more to my commendation beyond
measure. And that, whereas before he did bear me respect for his sake,
he do do it now much more for my own; which is a great blessing to me.
Sir G. Carteret having told me what he did yesterday concerning his
speaking to my Lord Chancellor about me. So that on all hands, by God’s
blessing, I find myself a very rising man. By and by comes my Lord
Peterborough in, with whom we talked a good while, and he is going
tomorrow towards Tangier again. I perceive there is yet good hopes of
peace with Guyland,--[A Moorish usurper, who had put himself at the head
of an army for the purpose of attacking Tangier.--B.]--which is of
great concernment to Tangier. And many other things I heard which yet
I understand not, and so cannot remember. My Lord and Lord Peterborough
going out to the Solicitor General about the drawing up of this
Commission, I went to Westminster Hall with Mr. Moore, and there
meeting Mr. Townsend, he would needs take me to Fleet Street, to one
Mr. Barwell, squire sadler to the King, and there we and several other
Wardrobe-men dined. We had a venison pasty, and other good plain and
handsome dishes; the mistress of the house a pretty, well-carriaged
woman, and a fine hand she hath; and her maid a pretty brown lass. But
I do find my nature ready to run back to my old course of drinking
wine and staying from my business, and yet, thank God, I was not
fully contented with it, but did stay at little ease, and after dinner
hastened home by water, and so to my office till late at night. In the
evening Mr. Hayward came to me to advise with me about the business of
the Chest, which I have now a mind to put in practice, though I know it
will vex Sir W. Batten, which is one of the ends (God forgive me) that I
have in it. So home, and eat a bit, and to bed.