8th. Up by four o’clock in the morning, and at five by water to
Woolwich, there to see the manner of tarring, and all the morning
looking to see the several proceedings in making of cordage, and other
things relating to that sort of works, much to my satisfaction. At noon
came Mr. Coventry on purpose from Hampton Court to see the same, and
dined with Mr. Falconer, and after dinner to several experiments of
Hemp, and particularly some Milan hemp that is brought over ready
dressed. Thence we walked talking, very good discourse all the way to
Greenwich, and I do find most excellent discourse from him. Among other
things, his rule of suspecting every man that proposes any thing to him
to be a knave; or, at least, to have some ends of his own in it. Being
led thereto by the story of Sir John Millicent, that would have had a
patent from King James for every man to have had leave to have given him
a shilling; and that he might take it of every man that had a mind to
give it, and being answered that that was a fair thing, but what needed
he a patent for it, and what he would do to them that would not give
him. He answered, he would not force them; but that they should come to
the Council of State, to give a reason why they would not. Another rule
is a proverb that he hath been taught, which is that a man that cannot
sit still in his chamber (the reason of which I did not understand him),
and he that cannot say no (that is, that is of so good a nature that he
cannot deny any thing, or cross another in doing any thing), is not fit
for business. The last of which is a very great fault of mine, which
I must amend in. Thence by boat; I being hot, he put the skirt of
his cloak about me; and it being rough, he told me the passage of a
Frenchman through London Bridge, where, when he saw the great fall, he
begun to cross himself and say his prayers in the greatest fear in the
world, and soon as he was over, he swore “Morbleu! c’est le plus grand
plaisir du monde,” being the most like a French humour in the world.

     [When the first editions of this Diary were printed no note was
     required here.  Before the erection of the present London Bridge the
     fall of water at the ebb tide was great, and to pass at that time
     was called “Shooting the bridge”.  It was very hazardous for small
     boats.  The ancient mode, even in Henry VIII.’s time, of going to
     the Tower and Greenwich, was to land at the Three Cranes, in Upper
     Thames Street, suffer the barges to shoot the bridge, and to enter
     them again at Billingsgate.  See Cavendish’s “Wolsey,” p. 40, ed.