30th. Up betimes, and to my office, where I found Griffen’s girl making
it clean, but, God forgive me! what a mind I had to her, but did not
meddle with her. She being gone, I fell upon boring holes for me to see
from my closet into the great office, without going forth, wherein I
please myself much. So settled to business, and at noon with my wife to
the Wardrobe, and there dined, and staid talking all the afternoon with
my Lord, and about four o’clock took coach with my wife and Lady, and
went toward my house, calling at my Lady Carteret’s, who was within by
chance (she keeping altogether at Deptford for a month or two), and so
we sat with her a little. Among other things told my Lady how my Lady
Fanshaw is fallen out with her only for speaking in behalf of the
French, which my Lady wonders at, they having been formerly like
sisters, but we see there is no true lasting friendship in the world.
Thence to my house, where I took great pride to lead her through the
Court by the hand, she being very fine, and her page carrying up her
train. She staid a little at my house, and then walked through the
garden, and took water, and went first on board the King’s pleasure
boat, which pleased her much. Then to Greenwich Park; and with much ado
she was able to walk up to the top of the hill, and so down again, and
took boat, and so through bridge to Blackfryers, and home, she being
much pleased with the ramble in every particular of it. So we supped
with her, and then walked home, and to bed.

                              OBSERVATIONS.

This I take to be as bad a juncture as ever I observed. The King and
his new Queen minding their pleasures at Hampton Court. All people
discontented; some that the King do not gratify them enough; and the
others, Fanatiques of all sorts, that the King do take away their
liberty of conscience; and the height of the Bishops, who I fear will
ruin all again. They do much cry up the manner of Sir H. Vane’s death,
and he deserves it. They clamour against the chimney-money, and say they
will not pay it without force. And in the mean time, like to have war
abroad; and Portugall to assist, when we have not money to pay for any
ordinary layings-out at home. Myself all in dirt about building of my
house and Sir W. Batten’s a story higher. Into a good way, fallen on
minding my business and saving money, which God encrease; and I do take
great delight in it, and see the benefit of it. In a longing mind of
going to see Brampton, but cannot get three days time, do what I can. In
very good health, my wife and myself.