21st. Up early, and though I found myself out of order and cold, and the
weather cold and likely to rain, yet upon my promise and desire to
do what I intended, I did take boat and down to Greenwich, to Captain
Cocke’s, who hath a most pleasant seat, and neat. Here I drank wine, and
eat some fruit off the trees; and he showed a great rarity, which was
two or three of a great number of silver dishes and plates, which he
bought of an embassador that did lack money, in the edge or rim of which
was placed silver and gold medalls, very ancient, and I believe wrought,
by which, if they be, they are the greatest rarity that ever I saw in
my life, and I will show Mr. Crumlum them. Thence to Woolwich to the
Rope-yard; and there looked over several sorts of hemp, and did fall
upon my great survey of seeing the working and experiments of the
strength and the charge in the dressing of every sort; and I do think
have brought it to so great a certainty, as I have done the King great
service in it: and do purpose to get it ready against the Duke’s coming
to town to present to him. I breakfasted at Mr. Falconer’s well, and
much pleased with my inquiries. Thence to the dock, where we walked in
Mr. Shelden’s garden, eating more fruit, and drinking, and eating figs,
which were very good, and talking while the Royal James was bringing
towards the dock, and then we went out and saw the manner and trouble of
docking such a ship, which yet they could not do, but only brought her
head into the Dock, and so shored her up till next tide. But, good God!
what a deal of company was there from both yards to help to do it, when
half the company would have done it as well. But I see it is impossible
for the King to have things done as cheap as other men. Thence by water,
and by and by landing at the riverside somewhere among the reeds, we
walked to Greenwich, where to Cocke’s house again and walked in the
garden, and then in to his lady, who I find is still pretty, but was
now vexed and did speak very discontented and angry to the Captain for
disappointing a gentleman that he had invited to dinner, which he took
like a wise man and said little, but she was very angry, which put me
clear out of countenance that I was sorry I went in. So after I had
eat still some more fruit I took leave of her in the garden plucking
apricots for preserving, and went away and so by water home, and there
Mr. Moore coming and telling me that my Lady goes into the country
to-morrow, I carried my wife by coach to take her leave of her father,
I staying in Westminster Hall, she going away also this week, and thence
to my Lady’s, where we staid and supped with her, but found that my Lady
was truly angry and discontented with us for our neglecting to see her
as we used to do, but after a little she was pleased as she was used to
be, at which we were glad. So after supper home to bed.