25th (Christmas Day). Up pretty early, leaving my wife not well in
bed, and with my boy walked, it being a most brave cold and dry frosty
morning, and had a pleasant walk to White Hall, where I intended to have
received the Communion with the family, but I came a little too late.
So I walked up into the house and spent my time looking over pictures,
particularly the ships in King Henry the VIIIth’s Voyage to Bullen;

     [Boulogne.  These pictures were given by George III. to the Society
     of Antiquaries, who in return presented to the king a set of Thomas
     Hearne’s works, on large paper.  The pictures were reclaimed by
     George IV., and are now at Hampton Court.  They were exhibited in
     the Tudor Exhibition, 1890.]

marking the great difference between their build then and now. By and by
down to the chappell again where Bishopp Morley preached upon the song
of the Angels, “Glory to God on high, on earth peace, and good will
towards men.” Methought he made but a poor sermon, but long, and
reprehending the mistaken jollity of the Court for the true joy that
shall and ought to be on these days, he particularized concerning their
excess in plays and gaming, saying that he whose office it is to keep
the gamesters in order and within bounds, serves but for a second rather
in a duell, meaning the groom-porter. Upon which it was worth observing
how far they are come from taking the reprehensions of a bishopp
seriously, that they all laugh in the chappell when he reflected on
their ill actions and courses. He did much press us to joy in these
publique days of joy, and to hospitality. But one that stood by
whispered in my ear that the Bishopp himself do not spend one groat to
the poor himself. The sermon done, a good anthem followed, with vialls,
and then the King came down to receive the Sacrament. But I staid not,
but calling my boy from my Lord’s lodgings, and giving Sarah some good
advice, by my Lord’s order, to be sober and look after the house, I
walked home again with great pleasure, and there dined by my wife’s
bed-side with great content, having a mess of brave plum-porridge

     [The national Christmas dish of plum pudding is a modern evolution
     from plum porridge, which was probably similar to the dish still
     produced at Windsor Castle.]

and a roasted pullet for dinner, and I sent for a mince-pie abroad, my
wife not being well to make any herself yet. After dinner sat talking a
good while with her, her [pain] being become less, and then to see Sir
W. Pen a little, and so to my office, practising arithmetique alone and
making an end of last night’s book with great content till eleven at
night, and so home to supper and to bed.