27th. Up early, not quite rid of my pain. I took more physique, and so
made myself ready to go forth. So to my Lord, who rose as soon as he
heard I was there; and in his nightgown and shirt stood talking with me
alone two hours,. I believe, concerning his greatest matters of state
and interest. Among other things, that his greatest design is, first,
to get clear of all debts to the King for the Embassy money, and then a
pardon. Then, to get his land settled; and then to, discourse and advise
what is best for him, whether to keep his sea employment longer or no.
For he do discern that the Duke would be willing to have him out, and
that by Coventry’s means. And here he told me, how the terms at Argier
were wholly his; and that he did plainly tell Lawson and agree with him,
that he would have the honour of them, if they should ever be agreed
to; and that accordingly they did come over hither entitled, “Articles
concluded on by Sir J. Lawson, according to instructions received from
His Royal Highness James Duke of York, &c., and from His Excellency
the Earle of Sandwich.” (Which however was more than needed; but Lawson
tells my Lord in his letter, that it was not he, but the Council of Warr
that would have “His Royal Highness” put into the title, though he
did not contribute one word to it.) But the Duke of York did yesterday
propose them to the Council, to be printed with this title: “Concluded
on, by Sir J. Lawson, Knt.” and my Lord quite left out. Here I find my
Lord very politique; for he tells me, that he discerns they design to
set up Lawson as much as they can and that he do counterplot them by
setting him up higher still; by which they will find themselves spoiled
of their design, and at last grow jealous of Lawson. This he told me
with much pleasure; and that several of the Duke’s servants, by name my
Lord Barkeley [of Stratton], Mr. Talbot, and others, had complained to
my Lord, of Coventry, and would have him out. My Lord do acknowledge
that his greatest obstacle is Coventry. He did seem to hint such a
question as this: “Hitherto I have been supported by the King and
Chancellor against the Duke; but what if it should come about, that it
should be the Duke and Chancellor against the King?” which, though he
said it in these plain words, yet I could not fully understand it; but
may more here after. My Lord did also tell me, that the Duke himself
at Portsmouth did thank my Lord for all his pains and care; and that
he perceived it must be the old Captains that must do the business; and
that the new ones would spoil all. And that my Lord did very discreetly
tell the Duke (though quite against his judgement and inclination),
that, however, the King’s new captains ought to be borne with a little
and encouraged. By which he will oblige that party, and prevent, as much
as may be, their envy; but he says that certainly things will go to rack
if ever the old captains should be wholly out, and the new ones only
command. Then we fell to talk of Sir J. Minnes, of whom my Lord hath
a very slight opinion, and that at first he did come to my Lord very
displeased and sullen, and had studied and turned over all his books to
see whether it had ever been that two flags should ride together in the
main-top, but could not find it, nay, he did call his captains on board
to consult them. So when he came by my Lord’s side, he took down his
flag, and all the day did not hoist it again, but next day my Lord did
tell him that it was not so fit to ride without a flag, and therefore
told him that he should wear it in the fore-top, for it seems my Lord
saw his instructions, which were that he should not wear his flag in the
maintop in the presence of the Duke or my Lord. But that after that my
Lord did caress him, and he do believe him as much his friend as his
interest will let him. I told my Lord of the late passage between Swan
and me, and he told me another lately between Dr. Dell and himself when
he was in the country. At last we concluded upon dispatching all his
accounts as soon as possible, and so I parted, and to my office, where
I met Sir W. Pen, and he desired a turn with me in the garden, where
he told me the day now was fixed for his going into Ireland;--[Penn was
Governor of Kinsale.-B.]--and that whereas I had mentioned some service
he could do a friend of mine there, Saml. Pepys,

     [Mentioned elsewhere as “My cousin in Ireland.”  He was son of Lord
     Chief Justice Richard Pepys.]

he told me he would most readily do what I would command him, and then
told me we must needs eat a dish of meat together before he went, and
so invited me and my wife on Sunday next. To all which I did give a cold
consent, for my heart cannot love or have a good opinion of him since
his last playing the knave with me, but he took no notice of our
difference at all, nor I to him, and so parted, and I by water to
Deptford, where I found Sir W. Batten alone paying off the yard three
quarters pay. Thence to dinner, where too great a one was prepared, at
which I was very much troubled, and wished I had not been there. After
dinner comes Sir J. Minnes and some captains with him, who had been at
a Councill of Warr to-day, who tell us they have acquitted Captain
Hall, who was accused of cowardice in letting of old Winter, the Argier
pyrate, go away from him with a prize or two; and also Captain Diamond
of the murder laid to him of a man that he had struck, but he lived many
months after, till being drunk, he fell into the hold, and there broke
his jaw and died, but they say there are such bawdy articles against
him as never were heard of .... To the pay again, where I left them, and
walked to Redriffe, and so home, and there came Mr. Creed and Shepley to
me, and staid till night about my Lord’s accounts, our proceeding to set
them in order, and so parted and I to bed. Mr. Holliard had been with my
wife to-day, and cured her of her pain in her ear by taking out a most
prodigious quantity of hard wax that had hardened itself in the bottom
of the ear, of which I am very glad.