5th. Up, it being a snow and hard frost, and being up I did call up
Sarah, who do go away to-day or to-morrow. I paid her her wages, and
gave her 10s. myself, and my wife 5s. to give her. For my part I think
never servant and mistress parted upon such foolish terms in the world
as they do, only for an opinion in my wife that she is ill-natured, in
all other things being a good servant. The wench cried, and I was
ready to cry too, but to keep peace I am content she should go, and the
rather, though I say nothing of that, that Jane may come into her place.
This being done, I walked towards Guildhall, thither being summoned by
the Commissioners for the Lieutenancy; but they sat not this morning. So
meeting in my way W. Swan, I took him to a house thereabouts, and gave
him a morning draft of buttered ale;

     [Buttered ale must have been a horrible concoction, as it is
     described as ale boiled with lump sugar and spice.]

he telling me still much of his Fanatique stories, as if he were a great
zealot, when I know him to be a very rogue. But I do it for discourse,
and to see how things stand with him and his party; who I perceive have
great expectation that God will not bless the Court nor Church, as it is
now settled, but they must be purified. The worst news he tells me, is
that Mr. Chetwind is dead, my old and most ingenious acquaintance. He is
dead, worth L3,000, which I did not expect, he living so high as he did
always and neatly. He hath given W. Symons his wife L300, and made Will
one of his executors. Thence to the Temple to my counsel, and thence to
Gray’s Inn to meet with Mr. Cole but could not, and so took a turn or
two in the garden, being very pleasant with the snow and frost. Thence
to my brother’s, and there I eat something at dinner and transcribed
a copy or two of the state of my uncle’s estate, which I prepared last
night, and so to the Temple Church, and there walked alone till 4 or 5
o’clock, and then to my cozen Turner’s chamber and staid there, up and
down from his to Calthrop’s and Bernard’s chambers, till so late, that
Mr. Cole not coming, we broke up for meeting this night, and so taking
my uncle Thomas homewards with me by coach, talking of our desire to
have a peace, and set him down at Gracious-street end, and so home, and
there I find Gosnell come, who, my wife tells me, is like to prove
a pretty companion, of which I am glad. So to my office for a little
business and then home, my mind having been all this day in most
extraordinary trouble and care for my father, there being so great
an appearance of my uncle’s going away with the greatest part of the
estate, but in the evening by Gosnell’s coming I do put off these
thoughts to entertain myself with my wife and her, who sings exceeding
well, and I shall take great delight in her, and so merrily to bed.