13th. Up to Hinchingbroke, and there with Mr. Sheply did look all over
the house, and I do, I confess, like well of the alteracions, and do
like the staircase, but there being nothing to make the outside more
regular and modern, I am not satisfied with it, but do think it to be
too much to be laid out upon it. Thence with Sheply to Huntingdon to
the Crown, and there did sit and talk, and eat a breakfast of cold roast
beef, and so he to St. Ives Market, and I to Sir Robert Bernard’s for
council, having a letter from my Lord Sandwich to that end. He do give
it me with much kindness in appearance, and upon my desire do promise to
put off my uncle’s admittance, if he can fairly, and upon the whole do
make my case appear better to me than my cozen Roger did, but not so but
that we are liable to much trouble, and that it will be best to come
to an agreement if possible. With my mind here also pretty well to see
things proceed so well I returned to Brampton, and spent the morning in
looking over papers and getting my copies ready against to-morrow. So to
dinner, and then to walk with my father and other business, when by and
by comes in my uncle Thomas and his son Thomas to see us, and very calm
they were and we to them. And after a short How do you, and drinking a
cup of beer, they went away again, and so by and by my father and I
to Mr. Phillips, and there discoursed with him in order to to-morrow’s
business of the Court and getting several papers ready, when presently
comes in my uncle Thomas and his son thither also, but finding us there
I believe they were disappointed and so went forth again, and went to
the house that Prior has lately bought of us (which was Barton’s) and
there did make entry and forbade paying rent to us, as now I hear they
have done everywhere else, and that that was their intent in coming
to see us this day. I perceive most of the people that do deal with us
begin to be afraid that their title to what they buy will not be good.
Which troubled me also I confess a little, but I endeavoured to remove
all as well as I could. Among other things they make me afraid that
Barton was never admitted to that that my uncle bought of him, but I
hope the contrary. Thence home, and with my father took a melancholy
walk to Portholme, seeing the country-maids milking their cows there,
they being there now at grass, and to see with what mirth they come all
home together in pomp with their milk, and sometimes they have musique
go before them. So back home again, and to supper, and in comes Piggott
with a counterfeit bond which by agreement between us (though it be very
just in itself) he has made, by which I shall lay claim to the interest
of the mortgage money, and so waiting with much impatience and doubt the
issue of to-morrow’s Court, I to bed, but hardly slept half an hour the
whole night, my mind did so run with fears of to-morrow.