23rd. Up early, this morning, and my people are taking down the hangings
and things in my house because of the great dust that is already made by
the pulling down of Sir W. Batten’s house, and will be by my own when
I come to it. To my office, and there hard at work all the morning.
At noon to the Exchange to meet Dr. Williams, who sent me this morning
notice of his going into the country tomorrow, but could not find him,
but meeting with Frank Moore, my Lord Lambeth’s man formerly, we, and
two or three friends of his did go to a tavern, and there they drank,
but I nothing but small beer. In the next room one was playing very
finely of the dulcimer, which well played I like well, but one of our
own company, a talking fellow, did in discourse say much of this Act
against Seamen,

     [In 1662 was passed “An Act for providing of carriage by land and by
     water for the use of His Majesty’s Navy and Ordinance” (13-14 Gar.
     II., cap. 20), which gave power for impressing seamen, &c.]

for their being brought to account; and that it was made on purpose for
my Lord Sandwich, who was in debt L100,000, and hath been forced to have
pardon oftentimes from Oliver for the same: at which I was vexed at him,
but thought it not worth my trouble to oppose what he said, but took
leave and went home, and after a little dinner to my office again, and
in the evening Sir W. Warren came to me about business, and that being
done, discoursing of deals, I did offer to go along with him among
his deal ships, which we did to half a score, where he showed me the
difference between Dram, Swinsound, Christiania, and others, and told me
many pleasant notions concerning their manner of cutting and sawing them
by watermills, and the reason how deals become dearer and cheaper, among
others, when the snow is not so great as to fill up the values that they
may pass from hill to hill over the snow, then it is dear carriage. From
on board he took me to his yard, where vast and many places of deals,
sparrs, and bulks, &c., the difference between which I never knew
before, and indeed am very proud of this evening’s work. He had me into
his house, which is most pretty and neat and well furnished. After a
glass, not of wine, for I would not be tempted to drink any, but a glass
of mum, I well home by water, but it being late was forced to land at
the Custom House, and so home and to bed, and after I was a-bed, letters
came from the Duke for the fitting out of four ships forthwith from
Portsmouth (I know not yet for what) so I was forced to make Will get
them wrote, and signed them in bed and sent them away by express. And so
to sleep.