22nd (Lord’s day). This day I first put on my slasht doublet, which I
like very well. Mr. Shepley came to me in the morning, telling me that
he and my Lord came to town from Hinchinbroke last night. He and I spend
an hour in looking over his account, and then walked to the Wardrobe,
all the way discoursing of my Lord’s business. He tells me to my great
wonder that Mr. Barnwell is dead L500 in debt to my Lord. By and by my
Lord came from church, and I dined, with some others, with him, he very
merry, and after dinner took me aside and talked of state and other
matters. By and by to my brother Tom’s and took him out with me
homewards (calling at the Wardrobe to talk a little with Mr. Moore), and
so to my house, where I paid him all I owed him, and did make the L20 I
lately lent him up to L40, for which he shall give bond to Mr. Shepley,
for it is his money. So my wife and I to walk in the garden, where all
our talk was against Sir W. Pen, against whom I have lately had cause to
be much prejudiced. By and by he and his daughter came out to walk, so
we took no notice of them a great while, at last in going home spoke
a word or two, and so good night, and to bed. This day I am told of
a Portugall lady, at Hampton Court, that hath dropped a child already
since the Queen’s coming, but the king would not have them searched
whose it is; and so it is not commonly known yet. Coming home to-night,
I met with Will. Swan, who do talk as high for the Fanatiques as ever he
did in his life; and do pity my Lord Sandwich and me that we should be
given up to the wickedness of the world; and that a fall is coming upon
us all; for he finds that he and his company are the true spirit of the
nation, and the greater part of the nation too, who will have liberty of
conscience in spite of this “Act of Uniformity,” or they will die; and
if they may not preach abroad, they will preach in their own houses. He
told me that certainly Sir H. Vane must be gone to Heaven, for he died
as much a martyr and saint as ever man did; and that the King hath lost
more by that man’s death, than he will get again a good while. At all
which I know not what to think; but, I confess, I do think that the
Bishops will never be able to carry it so high as they do.