23rd (Lord’s day). This morning was brought me my boy’s fine livery,
which is very handsome, and I do think to keep to black and gold lace
upon gray, being the colour of my arms, for ever. To church in the
morning, and so home with Sir W. Batten, and there eat some boiled great
oysters, and so home, and while I was at dinner with my wife I was sick,
and was forced to vomit up my oysters again, and then I was well. By
and by a coach came to call me by my appointment, and so my wife and
I carried to Westminster to Mrs. Hunt’s, and I to Whitehall, Worcester
House, and to my Lord Treasurer’s to have found Sir G. Carteret, but
missed in all these places. So back to White Hall, and there met with
Captn. Isham, this day come from Lisbon, with letters from the Queen to
the King. And he did give me letters which speak that our fleet is all
at Lisbon;

     [One of these letters was probably from John Creed.  Mr. S. J.
     Davey, of 47, Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, in 1889 had in his
     possession nine long letters from Creed to Pepys.  In the first of
     these, dated from Lisbon, March, 1662, Creed wrote: “My Lord
     Embassador doth all he can to hasten the Queen’s Majestie’s
     embarquement, there being reasons enough against suffering any
     unnecessary delay.”  There appear to have been considerable delays
     in the arrangements for the following declaration of Charles II.
     was dated June 22nd, 1661: “Charles R.  Whereas his Maj. is resolved
     to declare, under his Royall hand and seale, the most illustrious
     Lady Infanta of Portugall to be his lawfull wife, before the Treaty
     shall be signed by the King of Portugall; which is to be done only
     for the better expediting the marriage, without sending to Rome for
     a dispensation, which the laws of Portugall would require if the
     said most Illustrious Infanta were to be betrothed in that
     Kingdome,” &c.]

and that the Queen do not intend to embarque sooner than tomorrow come
fortnight. So having sent for my wife, she and I to my Lady Sandwich,
and after a short visit away home. She home, and I to Sir G. Carteret’s
about business, and so home too, and Sarah having her fit we went to
bed.