1730.]

which he would have, and had done by a priest: and, some days after, she
had it again christened by a minister; the King, and Lord of Oxford,
and Duchesse of Suffolk, being witnesses: and christened with a proviso,
that it had not already been christened. Since that she left her Lord,
carrying away every thing in the house; so much as every dish, and
cloth, and servant but the porter. He is gone discontented into France,
they say, to enter a monastery; and now she is coming back again to her
house in Kingstreet. But I hear that the Queen did prick her out of the
list presented her by the King;

     [“By the King’s command Lord Clarendon, much against his
     inclination, had twice visited his royal mistress with a view of
     inducing her, by persuasions which he could not justify, to give way
     to the King’s determination to have Lady Castlemaine of her
     household....  Lord Clarendon has given a full account of all
     that transpired between himself, the King and the Queen, on this
     very unpleasant business [‘Continuation of Life of Clarendon,’ 1759,
     ff. 168-178).”--Steinman’s Memoir of Duchess of Cleveland, p. 35.
     “The day at length arrived when Lady Castlemaine was to be formally
     admitted a Lady of the Bedchamber.  The royal warrant, addressed to
     the Lord Chamberlain, bears date June 1, 1663, and includes with
     that of her ladyship, the names of the Duchess of Buckingham, the
     Countesses of Chesterfield and Bath, and the Countess Mareshall.  A
     separate warrant of the same day directs his lordship to admit the
     Countess of Suffolk as Groom of the Stole and first Lady of the
     Bedchamber, to which undividable offices she had, with the
     additional ones of Mistress of the Robes and Keeper of the Privy
     Purse, been nominated by a warrant dated April 2, 1662, wherein the
     reception of her oath is expressly deferred until the Queen’s
     household shall be established.  We here are furnished with the
     evidence that Charles would not sign the warrants for the five until
     Catherine had withdrawn her objection to his favourite one.”--
     Addenda to Steinman’s Memoir of Duchess of Cleveland (privately
     printed), 1874, p. i.]

desiring that she might have that favour done her, or that he would
send her from whence she come: and that the King was angry and the
Queen discontented a whole day and night upon it; but that the King hath
promised to have nothing to do with her hereafter. But I cannot believe
that the King can fling her off so, he loving her too well: and so I
writ this night to my Lady to be my opinion; she calling her my lady,
and the lady I admire. Here I find that my Lord hath lost the garden to
his lodgings, and that it is turning into a tennis-court. Hence by water
to the Wardrobe to see how all do there, and so home to supper and to
bed.