31st. Lay pretty long in bed, and then I up and to Westminster Hall, and
so to the Swan, sending for Mr. W. Bowyer, and there drank my morning
draft, and had some of his simple discourse. Among other things he tells
me how the difference comes between his fair cozen Butler and Collonell
Dillon, upon his opening letters of her brother’s from Ireland,
complaining of his knavery, and forging others to the contrary; and so
they are long ago quite broke off. Thence to a barber’s and so to my
wife, and at noon took her to Mrs. Pierces by invitacion to dinner,
where there came Dr. Clerke and his wife and sister and Mr. Knight,
chief chyrurgeon to the King and his wife. We were pretty merry, the two
men being excellent company, but I confess I am wedded from the opinion
either of Mrs. Pierces beauty upon discovery of her naked neck to-day,
being undrest when we came in, or of Mrs. Clerke’s genius, which I so
much admired, I finding her to be so conceited and fantastique in her
dress this day and carriage, though the truth is, witty enough. After
dinner with much ado the doctor and I got away to follow our business
for a while, he to his patients and I to the Tangier Committee, where
the Duke of York was, and we staid at it a good while, and thence in
order to the despatch of the boats and provisions for Tangier away, Mr.
Povy, in his coach, carried Mr. Gauden and I into London to Mr. Bland’s,
the merchant, where we staid discoursing upon the reason of the delay
of the going away of these things a great while. Then to eat a dish
of anchovies, and drink wine and syder, and very merry, but above all
things pleased to hear Mrs. Bland talk like a merchant in her husband’s
business very well, and it seems she do understand it and perform
a great deal. Thence merry back, Mr. Povy and, I to White Hall; he
carrying me thither on purpose to carry me into the ball this night
before the King. All the way he talking very ingenuously, and I find
him a fine gentleman, and one that loves to live nobly and neatly, as I
perceive by his discourse of his house, pictures, and horses. He brought
me first to the Duke’s chamber, where I saw him and the Duchess at
supper; and thence into the room where the ball was to be, crammed with
fine ladies, the greatest of the Court. By and by comes the King and
Queen, the Duke and Duchess, and all the great ones: and after seating
themselves, the King takes out the Duchess of York; and the Duke, the
Duchess of Buckingham; the Duke of Monmouth, my Lady Castlemaine; and so
other lords other ladies: and they danced the Bransle.

     “Branle.  Espece de danse de plusieurs personnes, qui se tiennent
     par la main, et qui se menent tour-a-tour. “Dictionnaire de
     l’Academie.  A country dance mentioned by Shakespeare and other
     dramatists under the form of brawl, which word continued to be used
     in the eighteenth century.

                    “My grave Lord Keeper led the brawls;
                    The seals and maces danced before him.”
                                              Gray, ‘A Long Story.’

After that, the King led a lady a single Coranto--[swift and
lively]--and then the rest of the lords, one after another, other ladies
very noble it was, and great pleasure to see. Then to country dances;
the King leading the first, which he called for; which was, says he,
“Cuckolds all awry,” the old dance of England. Of the ladies that
danced, the Duke of Monmouth’s mistress, and my Lady Castlemaine, and
a daughter of Sir Harry de Vicke’s, were the best. The manner was, when
the King dances, all the ladies in the room, and the Queen herself,
stand up: and indeed he dances rarely, and much better that the Duke
of York. Having staid here as long as I thought fit, to my infinite
content, it being the greatest pleasure I could wish now to see at
Court, I went out, leaving them dancing, and to Mrs. Pierces, where I
found the company had staid very long for my coming, but all gone but my
wife, and so I took her home by coach and so to my Lord’s again, where
after some supper to bed, very weary and in a little pain from my riding
a little uneasily to-night in the coach.

Thus ends this year with great mirth to me and my wife: Our condition
being thus:--we are at present spending a night or two at my Lord’s
lodgings at White Hall. Our home at the Navy-office, which is and hath a
pretty while been in good condition, finished and made very convenient.
My purse is worth about L650, besides my goods of all sorts, which
yet might have been more but for my late layings out upon my house and
public assessment, and yet would not have been so much if I had not
lived a very orderly life all this year by virtue of the oaths that God
put into my heart to take against wine, plays, and other expenses, and
to observe for these last twelve months, and which I am now going to
renew, I under God owing my present content thereunto. My family is
myself and wife, William, my clerk; Jane, my wife’s upper mayde, but, I
think, growing proud and negligent upon it: we must part, which troubles
me; Susan, our cook-mayde, a pretty willing wench, but no good cook; and
Wayneman, my boy, who I am now turning away for his naughty tricks. We
have had from the beginning our healths to this day very well, blessed
be God! Our late mayde Sarah going from us (though put away by us) to
live with Sir W. Pen do trouble me, though I love the wench, so that
we do make ourselves a little strange to him and his family for it, and
resolve to do so. The same we are for other reasons to my Lady Batten
and hers. We have lately had it in our thoughts, and I can hardly bring
myself off of it, since Mrs. Gosnell cannot be with us, to find out
another to be in the quality of a woman to my wife that can sing or
dance, and yet finding it hard to save anything at the year’s end as I
now live, I think I shall not be such a fool till I am more warm in my
purse, besides my oath of entering into no such expenses till I am worth
L1000. By my last year’s diligence in my office, blessed be God! I am
come to a good degree of knowledge therein; and am acknowledged so by
all--the world, even the Duke himself, to whom I have a good access and
by that, and my being Commissioner with him for Tangier, he takes
much notice of me; and I doubt not but, by the continuance of the same
endeavours, I shall in a little time come to be a man much taken notice
of in the world, specially being come to so great an esteem with Mr.
Coventry. The only weight that lies heavy upon my mind is the ending
the business with my uncle Thomas about my-dead uncle’s estate, which
is very ill on our side, and I fear when all is done I must be forced to
maintain my father myself, or spare a good deal towards it out of my own
purse, which will be a very great pull back to me in my fortune. But I
must be contented and bring it to an issue one way or other. Publique
matters stand thus: The King is bringing, as is said, his family, and
Navy, and all other his charges, to a less expence. In the mean time,
himself following his pleasures more than with good advice he would do;
at least, to be seen to all the world to do so. His dalliance with my
Lady Castlemaine being publique, every day, to his great reproach; and
his favouring of none at Court so much as those that are the confidants
of his pleasure, as Sir H. Bennet and Sir Charles Barkeley; which, good
God! put it into his heart to mend, before he makes himself too much
contemned by his people for it! The Duke of Monmouth is in so great
splendour at Court, and so dandled by the King, that some doubt, if the
King should have no child by the Queen (which there is yet no appearance
of), whether he would not be acknowledged for a lawful son; and that
there will be a difference follow upon it between the Duke of York and
him; which God prevent! My Lord Chancellor is threatened by people to be
questioned, the next sitting of the Parliament, by some spirits that do
not love to see him so great: but certainly he is a good servant to the
King. The Queen-Mother is said to keep too great a Court now; and her
being married to my Lord St. Albans is commonly talked of; and that they
had a daughter between them in France, how true, God knows. The Bishopps
are high, and go on without any diffidence in pressing uniformity; and
the Presbyters seem silent in it, and either conform or lay down, though
without doubt they expect a turn, and would be glad these endeavours of
the other Fanatiques would take effect; there having been a plot lately
found, for which four have been publickly tried at the Old Bayley and
hanged. My Lord Sandwich is still in good esteem, and now keeping his
Christmas in the country; and I in good esteem, I think, as any man can
be, with him. Mr. Moore is very sickly, and I doubt will hardly get over
his late fit of sickness, that still hangs on him. In fine, for the good
condition of myself, wife, family, and estate, in the great degree that
it is, and for the public state of the nation, so quiett as it is, the
Lord God be praised!

     ETEXT EDITOR’S BOOKMARKS FOR DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1962 N.S.:

     Afeard of being louzy
     Afeard that my Lady Castlemaine will keep still with the King
     Afraid now to bring in any accounts for journeys
     After taking leave of my wife, which we could hardly do kindly
     Agreed at L3 a year (she would not serve under)
     All may see how slippery places all courtiers stand in
     All made much worse in their report among people than they are
     All the fleas came to him and not to me
     Aptness I have to be troubled at any thing that crosses me
     As much his friend as his interest will let him
     Badge of slavery upon the whole people (taxes)
     Bewailing the vanity and disorders of the age
     Bowling-ally (where lords and ladies are now at bowles)
     Cannot but be with the workmen to see things done to my mind
     Care not for his commands, and especially on Sundays
     Catched cold yesterday by putting off my stockings
     Charles Barkeley’s greatness is only his being pimp to the King
     Comb my head clean, which I found so foul with powdering
     Command of an army is not beholden to any body to make him King
     Deliver her from the hereditary curse of child-bearing
     Did much insist upon the sin of adultery
     Discontented at the pride and luxury of the Court
     Discoursed much against a man’s lying with his wife in Lent
     Enjoy some degree of pleasure now that we have health, money
     Fanatiques do say that the end of the world is at hand
     Fear she should prove honest and refuse and then tell my wife
     Fearing that Sarah would continue ill, wife and I removed
     God forgive me! what a mind I had to her
     Goldsmiths in supplying the King with money at dear rates
     Hard matter to settle to business after so much leisure
     Hate in others, and more in myself, to be careless of keys
     He made but a poor sermon, but long
     Holes for me to see from my closet into the great office
     Hopes to have had a bout with her before she had gone
     I fear that it must be as it can, and not as I would
     I know not yet what that is, and am ashamed to ask
     Joyne the lion’s skin to the fox’s tail
     King dined at my Lady Castlemaine’s, and supped, every day
     Lady Castlemaine do speak of going to lie in at Hampton Court
     Lady Castlemaine is still as great with the King
     Lady Castlemaine’s interest at Court increases
     Last of a great many Presbyterian ministers
     Laughing and jeering at every thing that looks strange
     Let me blood, about sixteen ounces, I being exceedingly full
     Lord! to see the absurd nature of Englishmen
     Lust and wicked lives of the nuns heretofore in England
     Lying a great while talking and sporting in bed with my wife
     Muske Millon
     My Jane’s cutting off a carpenter’s long mustacho
     My first attempt being to learn the multiplication-table
     No good by taking notice of it, for the present she forbears
     Only wind do now and then torment me...  extremely
     Parliament hath voted 2s. per annum for every chimney in England
     Parson is a cunning fellow he is as any of his coat
     Peruques of hair, as the fashion now is for ladies to wear
     Pleasures are not sweet to me now in the very enjoying of them
     Raising of our roofs higher to enlarge our houses
     See her look dejectedly and slighted by people already
     See a dead man lie floating upon the waters
     Sermon; but, it being a Presbyterian one, it was so long
     She so cruel a hypocrite that she can cry when she pleases
     She also washed my feet in a bath of herbs, and so to bed
     Short of what I expected, as for the most part it do fall out
     Sir W. Pen did it like a base raskall, and so I shall remember
     Slight answer, at which I did give him two boxes on the ears
     So good a nature that he cannot deny any thing
     Sorry to hear that Sir W. Pen’s maid Betty was gone away
     Strange things he has been found guilty of, not fit to name
     Then to church to a tedious sermon
     They were not occupiers, but occupied (women)
     To Mr. Holliard’s in the morning, thinking to be let blood
     Trumpets were brought under the scaffold that he not be heard
     Up and took physique, but such as to go abroad with
     Up early and took my physique; it wrought all the morning well
     When the candle is going out, how they bawl and dispute
     Whether she suspected anything or no I know not
     Whether he would have me go to law or arbitracon with him
     Will upon occasion serve for a fine withdrawing room
     Will put Madam Castlemaine’s nose out of joynt
     With my whip did whip him till I was not able to stir