8th. Up betimes and to my office preparing an account to give the Duke
this morning of what we have of late done at the office. About 7 o’clock
I went forth thinking to go along with Sir John Minnes and the rest, and
I found them gone, which did vex me, so I went directly to the old Swan
and took boat before them to Sir G. Carteret’s lodgings at Whitehall,
and there staying till he was dressed talking with him, he and I to St.
James’s, where Sir Williams both and Sir John were come, and so up with
Mr. Coventry to the Duke; who, after he was out of his bed, did send for
us in; and, when he was quite ready, took us into his closet, and there
told us that he do intend to renew the old custom for the Admirals to
have their principal officers to meet them once a-week, to give them an
account what they have done that week; which I am glad of: and so the
rest did tell his Royal Highness that I could do it best for the time
past. And so I produced my short notes, and did give him an account of
all that we have of late done; and proposed to him several things for
his commands, which he did give us, and so dismissed us. The rest to
Deptford, I to the Exchequer to meet Mr. Townsend, where I hear he
is gone to the Sun tavern, and there found him with some friends at
breakfast, which I eat with him, and so we crossed the water together,
and in walking I told him my brother Tom’s intentions for a wife, which
he would do me all favour in to Mr. Young, whose kinswoman he do look
after. We took boat again at the Falcon, and there parted, and I to the
old Swan, and so to the Change, and there meeting Sir W. Warren did step
to a tavern, and there sat and talked about price of masts and other
things, and so broke up and to my office to see what business, and so
we took water again, and at the Tower I over to Redriffe, and there left
him in the boat and walked to Deptford, and there up and down the yard
speaking with people, and so Sir W. Pen coming out of the payhouse
did single me out to tell me Sir J. Minnes’ dislike of my blinding his
lights over his stairs (which indeed is very bad) and blocking up the
house of office on the leads. Which did trouble me. So I went into the
payhouse and took an occasion of speaking with him alone, and did give
him good satisfaction therein, so as that I am well pleased and do hope
now to have my closet on the leads without any more trouble, for he
do not object against my having a door upon the leads, but that all my
family should not make it a thoroughfare, which I am contented with. So
to the pay, and in the evening home in the barge, and so to my office,
and after doing some business there to my lodgings, and so to bed.