15th. Up and to my Lord’s and thence to the Duke, and followed him into
the Park, where, though the ice was broken and dangerous, yet he would
go slide upon his scates, which I did not like, but he slides very well.
So back and to his closett, whither my Lord Sandwich comes, and there
Mr. Coventry and we three had long discourse together about the matters
of the Navy; and, indeed, I find myself more and more obliged to Mr.
Coventry, who studies to do me all the right he can in every thing to
the Duke. Thence walked a good while up and down the gallerys; and among
others, met with Dr. Clerke, who in discourse tells me, that Sir Charles
Barkeley’s greatness is only his being pimp to the King, and to my Lady
Castlemaine. And yet for all this, that the King is very kind to the
Queen; who, he says, is one of the best women in the world. Strange how
the King is bewitched to this pretty Castlemaine. Thence to my Lord’s,
and there with Mr. Creed, Moore, and Howe to the Crown and dined, and
thence to Whitehall, where I walked up and down the gallerys, spending
my time upon the pictures, till the Duke and the Committee for Tangier
met (the Duke not staying with us), where the only matter was to
discourse with my Lord Rutherford, who is this day made Governor of
Tangier, for I know not what reasons; and my Lord of Peterborough to be
called home; which, though it is said it is done with kindness, yet
all the world may see it is done otherwise, and I am sorry to see a
Catholick Governor sent to command there, where all the rest of the
officers almost are such already. But God knows what the reason is! and
all may see how slippery places all courtiers stand in. Thence by coach
home, in my way calling upon Sir John Berkenheade, to speak about my
assessment of L42 to the Loyal Sufferers; which, I perceive, I cannot
help; but he tells me I have been abused by Sir R. Ford, which I
shall hereafter make use of when it shall be fit. Thence called at the
Major-General’s, Sir R. Browne, about my being assessed armes to the
militia; but he was abroad; and so driving through the backside of the
Shambles in Newgate Market, my coach plucked down two pieces of beef
into the dirt, upon which the butchers stopped the horses, and a great
rout of people in the street, crying that he had done him 40s and L5
worth of hurt; but going down, I saw that he had done little or none;
and so I give them a shilling for it and they were well contented, and
so home, and there to my Lady Batten’s to see her, who tells me she hath
just now a letter from Sir William, how that he and Sir J. Minnes did
very narrowly escape drowning on the road, the waters are so high; but
is well. But, Lord! what a hypocrite-like face she made to tell it me.
Thence to Sir W. Pen and sat long with him in discourse, I making myself
appear one of greater action and resolution as to publique business than
I have hitherto done, at which he listens, but I know is a rogue in his
heart and likes not, but I perceive I may hold up my head, and the more
the better, I minding of my business as I have done, in which God do and
will bless me. So home and with great content to bed, and talk and chat
with my wife while I was at supper, to our great pleasure.