8th. Up, and carrying Gosnell by coach, set her down at Temple Barr, she
going about business of hers today. By the way she was telling me how
Balty did tell her that my wife did go every day in the week to Court
and plays, and that she should have liberty of going abroad as often as
she pleased, and many other lies, which I am vexed at, and I doubt the
wench did come in some expectation of, which troubles me. So to the Duke
and Mr. Coventry, and alone, the rest being at a Pay and elsewhere, and
alone with Mr. Coventry I did read over our letter to my Lord Treasurer,
which I think now is done as well as it can be. Then to my Lord
Sandwich’s, and there spent the rest of the morning in making up my
Lord’s accounts with Mr. Moore, and then dined with Mr. Moore and
Battersby his friend, very well and merry, and good discourse. Then into
the Park, to see them slide with their skeates, which is very pretty.
And so to the Duke’s, where the Committee for Tangier met: and here we
sat down all with him at a table, and had much good discourse about the
business, and is to my great content. That done, I hearing what play it
was that is to be acted before the King to-night, I would not stay, but
home by coach, where I find my wife troubled about Gosnell, who brings
word that her uncle, justice Jiggins, requires her to come three times
a week to him, to follow some business that her mother intrusts her
withall, and that, unless she may have that leisure given her, he will
not have her take any place; for which we are both troubled, but there
is no help for it, and believing it to be a good providence of God to
prevent my running behindhand in the world, I am somewhat contented
therewith, and shall make my wife so, who, poor wretch, I know will
consider of things, though in good earnest the privacy of her life must
needs be irksome to her. So I made Gosnell and we sit up looking over
the book of Dances till 12 at night, not observing how the time went,
and so to prayers and to bed.