29th (Michaelmas day). This day my oaths for drinking of wine and going
to plays are out, and so I do resolve to take a liberty to-day, and then
to fall to them again. Up and by coach to White Hall, in my way taking
up Mr. Moore, and walked with him, talking a good while about business,
in St. James’s Park, and there left him, and to Mr. Coventry’s, and so
with him and Sir W. Pen up to the Duke, where the King came also and
staid till the Duke was ready. It being Collarday, we had no time to
talk with him about any business. They went out together. So we parted,
and in the park Mr. Cooke by appointment met me, to whom I did give
my thoughts concerning Tom’s match and their journey tomorrow, and did
carry him by water to Tom’s, and there taking up my wife, maid, dog, and
him, did carry them home, where my wife is much pleased with my house,
and so am I fully. I sent for some dinner and there dined, Mrs. Margaret
Pen being by, to whom I had spoke to go along with us to a play this
afternoon, and then to the King’s Theatre, where we saw “Midsummer’s
Night’s Dream,” which I had never seen before, nor shall ever again,
for it is the most insipid ridiculous play that ever I saw in my life. I
saw, I confess, some good dancing and some handsome women, which was all
my pleasure. Thence set my wife down at Madam Turner’s, and so by coach
home, and having delivered Pegg Pen to her father safe, went home, where
I find Mr. Deane, of Woolwich, hath sent me the modell he had promised
me; but it so far exceeds my expectations, that I am sorry almost he
should make such a present to no greater a person; but I am exceeding
glad of it, and shall study to do him a courtesy for it. So to my
office and wrote a letter to Tom’s mistress’s mother to send by Cooke
to-morrow. Then came Mr. Moore thinking to have looked over the business
of my Brampton papers against the Court, but my mind was so full of
other matters (as it is my nature when I have been a good while from a
business, that I have almost forgot it, I am loth to come to it again)
that I could not set upon it, and so he and I past the evening away in
discourse, and to my lodgings and to bed.