6th. Up early, and, going to my office, met Sir G. Carteret in coming
through the yard, and so walked a good while talking with him about
Sir W. Batten, and find that he is going down the wind in every body’s
esteem, and in that of his honesty by this letter that he wrote to
Captn. Allen concerning Alderman Barker’s hemp. Thence by water to
White Hall; and so to St. James’s; but there found Mr. Coventry gone to
Hampton Court. So to my Lord’s; and he is also gone: this being a great
day at the Council about some business at the Council before the King.
Here I met with Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon, who told me how Mr. Edward
Montagu hath lately had a duell with Mr. Cholmely, that is first
gentleman-usher to the Queen, and was a messenger from the King to her
in Portugall, and is a fine gentleman; but had received many affronts
from Mr. Montagu, and some unkindness from my Lord, upon his score (for
which I am sorry). He proved too hard for Montagu, and drove him so far
backward that he fell into a ditch, and dropt his sword, but with honour
would take no advantage over him; but did give him his life: and the
world says Mr. Montagu did carry himself very poorly in the business,
and hath lost his honour for ever with all people in it, of which I am
very glad, in hopes that it will humble him. I hear also that he hath
sent to my Lord to borrow L400, giving his brother Harvey’s’ security
for it, and that my Lord will lend it him, for which I am sorry. Thence
home, and at my office all the morning, and dined at home, and can
hardly keep myself from having a mind to my wench, but I hope I shall
not fall to such a shame to myself. All the afternoon also at my office,
and did business. In the evening came Mr. Bland the merchant to me, who
has lived long in Spain, and is concerned in the business of Tangier,
who did discourse with me largely of it, and after he was gone did send
me three or four printed things that he hath wrote of trade in general
and of Tangier particularly, but I do not find much in them. This
afternoon Mr. Waith was with me, and did tell me much concerning the
Chest, which I am resolved to look into; and I perceive he is sensible
of Sir W. Batten’s carriage; and is pleased to see any thing work
against him. Who, poor man, is, I perceive, much troubled, and did
yesterday morning walk in the garden with me, did tell me he did see
there was a design of bringing another man in his room, and took notice
of my sorting myself with others, and that we did business by ourselves
without him. Part of which is true, but I denied, and truly, any design
of doing him any such wrong as that. He told me he did not say it
particularly of me, but he was confident there was somebody intended
to be brought in, nay, that the trayne was laid before Sir W. Pen went,
which I was glad to hear him say. Upon the whole I see he perceives
himself tottering, and that he is suspected, and would be kind to me,
but I do my business in the office and neglect him. At night writing
in my study a mouse ran over my table, which I shut up fast under my
shelf’s upon my table till to-morrow, and so home and to bed.