10th. Up, and between eight and nine mounted again; but my feet so
swelled with yesterday’s pain, that I could not get on my boots, which
vexed me to the blood, but was forced to pay 4s. for a pair of old shoes
of my landlord’s, and so rid in shoes to Cambridge; but the way so good
that but for a little rain I had got very well thither, and set up at
the Beare: and there being spied in the street passing through the town
my cozen Angier came to me, and I must needs to his house, which I did;
and there found Dr. Fairbrother, with a good dinner, a barrel of good
oysters, a couple of lobsters, and wine. But, above all, telling me that
this day there is a Congregation for the choice of some officers in the
University, he after dinner gets me a gown, cap, and hood, and carries
me to the Schooles, where Mr. Pepper, my brother’s tutor, and this day
chosen Proctor, did appoint a M.A. to lead me into the Regent House,
where I sat with them, and did [vote] by subscribing papers thus: “Ego
Samuel Pepys eligo Magistrum Bernardum Skelton, (and which was more
strange, my old schoolfellow and acquaintance, and who afterwards did
take notice of me, and we spoke together), alterum e taxatoribus hujus
Academiae in annum sequentem.” The like I did for one Biggs, for the
other Taxor, and for other officers, as the Vice-Proctor (Mr. Covell),
for Mr. Pepper, and which was the gentleman that did carry me into the
Regent House. This being done, and the Congregation dissolved by the
Vice-Chancellor, I did with much content return to my Cozen Angier’s,
being much pleased of doing this jobb of work, which I had long wished
for and could never have had such a time as now to do it with so much
ease. Thence to Trinity Hall, and there staid a good while with Dr. John
Pepys, who tells me that [his] brother Roger has gone out of town to
keep a Court; and so I was forced to go to Impington, to take such
advice as my old uncle and his son Claxton could give me. Which I did,
and there supped and talked with them, but not of my business till by
and by after supper comes in, unlooked for, my cozen Roger, with whom by
and by I discoursed largely, and in short he gives me good counsel, but
tells me plainly that it is my best way to study a composition with my
uncle Thomas, for that law will not help us, and that it is but a folly
to flatter ourselves, with which, though much to my trouble, yet I was
well satisfied, because it told me what I am to trust to, and so to bed.