17th (Lord’s day). Up very early, this being the last Sunday that the
Presbyterians are to preach, unless they read the new Common Prayer and
renounce the Covenant,

     [On St. Bartholomew’s day, August 24th, 1662, the Act of Uniformity
     took effect, and about two hundred Presbyterian and Independent
     ministers lost their preferments.]

and so I had a mind to hear Dr. Bates’s farewell sermon, and walked
thither, calling first at my brother’s, where I found that he is come
home after being a week abroad with Dr. Pepys, nobody knows where, nor I
but by chance, that he was gone, which troubles me. So I called only at
the door, but did not ask for him, but went to Madam Turner’s to know
whether she went to church, and to tell her that I would dine with her;
and so walked to St. Dunstan’s, where, it not being seven o’clock
yet, the doors were not open; and so I went and walked an hour in the
Temple-garden, reading my vows, which it is a great content to me to
see how I am a changed man in all respects for the better, since I took
them, which the God of Heaven continue to me, and make me thankful for.
At eight o’clock I went, and crowded in at a back door among others, the
church being half-full almost before any doors were open publicly; which
is the first time that I have done so these many years since I used to
go with my father and mother, and so got into the gallery, beside the
pulpit, and heard very well. His text was, “Now the God of Peace--;” the
last Hebrews, and the 20th verse: he making a very good sermon, and very
little reflections in it to any thing of the times. Besides the sermon,
I was very well pleased with the sight of a fine lady that I have often
seen walk in Graye’s Inn Walks, and it was my chance to meet her again
at the door going out, and very pretty and sprightly she is, and I
believe the same that my wife and I some years since did meet at Temple
Bar gate and have sometimes spoke of. So to Madam Turner’s, and dined
with her. She had heard Parson Herring take his leave; tho’ he, by
reading so much of the Common Prayer as he did, hath cast himself out of
the good opinion of both sides. After dinner to St. Dunstan’s again; and
the church quite crowded before I came, which was just at one o’clock;
but I got into the gallery again, but stood in a crowd and did
exceedingly sweat all the time. He pursued his text again very well; and
only at the conclusion told us, after this manner: “I do believe that
many of you do expect that I should say something to you in reference to
the time, this being the last time that possibly I may appear here.
You know it is not my manner to speak any thing in the pulpit that is
extraneous to my text and business; yet this I shall say, that it is not
my opinion, fashion, or humour that keeps me from complying with what is
required of us; but something which, after much prayer, discourse, and
study yet remains unsatisfied, and commands me herein. Wherefore, if it
is my unhappiness not to receive such an illumination as should direct
me to do otherwise, I know no reason why men should not pardon me in
this world, and am confident that God will pardon me for it in the
next.” And so he concluded. Parson Herring read a psalm and chapters
before sermon; and one was the chapter in the Acts, where the story of
Ananias and Sapphira is. And after he had done, says he, “This is just
the case of England at present. God he bids us to preach, and men bid
us not to preach; and if we do, we are to be imprisoned and further
punished. All that I can say to it is, that I beg your prayers, and the
prayers of all good Christians, for us.” This was all the exposition he
made of the chapter in these very words, and no more. I was much pleased
with Dr. Bates’s manner of bringing in the Lord’s Prayer after his own;
thus, “In whose comprehensive words we sum up all our imperfect desires;
saying, ‘Our Father,’” &c. Church being done and it raining I took a
hackney coach and so home, being all in a sweat and fearful of getting
cold. To my study at my office, and thither came Mr. Moore to me and
walked till it was quite dark. Then I wrote a letter to my Lord Privy
Seale as from my Lord for Mr.-------to be sworn directly by deputy to my
Lord, he denying to swear him as deputy together with me. So that I am
now clear of it, and the profit is now come to be so little that I am
not displeased at my getting off so well. He being gone I to my study
and read, and so to eat a bit of bread and cheese and so to bed. I hear
most of the Presbyters took their leaves to-day, and that the City is
much dissatisfied with it. I pray God keep peace among us, and make the
Bishops careful of bringing in good men in their rooms, or else all will
fly a-pieces; for bad ones will not [go] down with the City.