10th. At the office all the morning, much business; and great hopes of
bringing things, by Mr. Coventry’s means, to a good condition in the
office. Dined at home, Mr. Hunt with us; to the office again in the
afternoon, but not meeting, as was intended, I went to my brother’s
and bookseller’s, and other places about business, and paid off all for
books to this day, and do not intend to buy any more of any kind a good
while, though I had a great mind to have bought the King’s works, as
they are new printed in folio, and present it to my Lord; but I think it
will be best to save the money. So home and to bed.

     [There is a beautiful copy of “The Workes of King Charles the
     Martyr, and Collections of Declarations, Treaties, &c.”  (2 vols.
     folio, 1662), in the Pepysian Library, with a very interesting note
     in the first volume by Pepys (dated October 7th, 1700), to the
     effect that he had collated it with a copy in Lambeth Library,
     presented by Dr. Zachary Cradock, Provost of Eton.  “This book being
     seized on board an English ship was delivered, by order of the
     Inquisition of Lisbon, to some of the English Priests to be perused
     and corrected according to the Rules of the ‘Index Expurgatorius.’
     Thus corrected it was given to Barnaby Crafford, English merchant
     there, and by him it was given to me, the English preacher resident
     there A.D. 1670, and by me as I then received it to the Library at
     Lambeth to be there preserved.  Nov. 2, 1678.  ‘Ita testor’, Zach.
     Cradock.--From which (through the favour of the most Reverend Father
     in God and my most honoured Friend his Grace the present Archbishop
     of Canterbury) I have this 7th of October, 1700, had an opportunity
     given me there (assisted by my clerk, Thomas Henderson), leisurely to
     overlook, and with my uttermost attention to note the said
     Expurgations through each part of this my own Book.”  Whole
     sentences in the book are struck through, as well as such words as
     Martyr, Defender of the Faith, More than Conqueror, &c.]