23rd. Up betimes and to my office, before noon my wife and I eat
something, thinking to have gone abroad together, but in comes Mr. Hunt,
who we were forced to stay to dinner, and so while that was got ready
he and I abroad about 2 or 3 small businesses of mine, and so back to
dinner, and after dinner he went away, and my wife and I and Ashwell by
coach, set my wife down at her mother’s and Ashwell at my Lord’s, she
going to see her father and mother, and I to Whitehall, being fearful
almost, so poor a spirit I have, of meeting Major Holmes. By and by
the Duke comes, and we with him about our usual business, and then
the Committee for Tangier, where, after reading my Lord Rutherford’s
commission and consented to, Sir R. Ford, Sir W. Rider, and I were
chosen to bring in some laws for the Civill government of it, which I am
little able to do, but am glad to be joyned with them, for I shall learn
something of them. Thence to see my Lord Sandwich, and who should I meet
at the door but Major Holmes. He would have gone away, but I told him I
would not spoil his visitt, and would have gone, but however we fell to
discourse and he did as good as desire excuse for the high words that
did pass in his heat the other day, which I was willing enough to close
with, and after telling him my mind we parted, and I left him to speak
with my Lord, and I by coach home, where I found Will. Howe come home
to-day with my wife, and staid with us all night, staying late up
singing songs, and then he and I to bed together in Ashwell’s bed and
she with my wife. This the first time that I ever lay in the room. This
day Greatorex brought me a very pretty weather-glass for heat and cold.

     [The thermometer was invented in the sixteenth century, but it is
     disputed who the inventor was.  The claims of Santorio are supported
     by Borelli and Malpighi, while the title of Cornelius Drebbel is
     considered undoubted by Boerhaave.  Galileo’s air thermometer, made
     before 1597, was the foundation of accurate thermometry.  Galileo
     also invented the alcohol thermometer about 1611 or 1612.  Spirit
     thermometers were made for the Accademia del Cimento, and described
     in the Memoirs of that academy.  When the academy was dissolved by
     order of the Pope, some of these thermometers were packed away in a
     box, and were not discovered until early in the nineteenth century.
     Robert Hooke describes the manufacture and graduation of
     thermometers in his “Micrographia” (1665).]