17th. Up and to my office, and there we sat all the morning, and at
noon my wife being gone to Chelsey with her brother and sister and Mrs.
Lodum, to see the wassell at the school, where Mary Ashwell is, I took
home Mr. Pett and he dined with me all alone, and much discourse we had
upon the business of the office, and so after dinner broke up and with
much ado, it raining hard, which it has not done a great while now,
but only frost a great while, I got a coach and so to the Temple, where
discoursed with Mr. W. Montagu about borrowing some money for my Lord,
and so by water (where I have not been a good while through cold) to
Westminster to Sir W. Wheeler’s, whom I found busy at his own house with
the Commissioners of Sewers, but I spoke to him about my Lord’s business
of borrowing money, and so to my Lord of Sandwich, to give him an
account of all, whom I found at cards with Pickering; but he made an end
soon: and so all alone, he and I, after I had given him an account,
he told me he had a great secret to tell me, such as no flesh knew but
himself, nor ought; which was this: that yesterday morning Eschar, Mr.
Edward Montagu’s man, did come to him from his master with some of the
Clerks of the Exchequer, for my Lord to sign to their books for the
Embassy money; which my Lord very civilly desired not to do till he had
spoke with his master himself. In the afternoon, my Lord and my Lady
Wright being at cards in his chamber, in comes Mr. Montagu; and desiring
to speak with my Lord at the window in his chamber, he begun to charge
my Lord with the greatest ingratitude in the world: that he that had
received his earldom, garter, L4000 per annum, and whatever he is in the
world, from him, should now study him all the dishonour that he could;
and so fell to tell my Lord, that if he should speak all that he knew of
him, he could do so and so. In a word, he did rip up all that could be
said that was unworthy, and in the basest terms they could be spoken
in. To which my Lord answered with great temper, justifying himself,
but endeavouring to lessen his heat, which was a strange temper in him,
knowing that he did owe all he hath in the world to my Lord, and that he
is now all that he is by his means and favour. But my Lord did forbear
to increase the quarrel, knowing that it would be to no good purpose
for the world to see a difference in the family; but did allay him so
as that he fell to weeping. And after much talk (among other things Mr.
Montagu telling him that there was a fellow in the town, naming me, that
had done ill offices, and that if he knew it to be so, he would have
him cudgelled) my Lord did promise him that, if upon account he saw that
there was not many tradesmen unpaid, he would sign the books; but if
there was, he could not bear with taking too great a debt upon him. So
this day he sent him an account, and a letter assuring him there was not
above L200 unpaid; and so my Lord did sign to the Exchequer books. Upon
the whole, I understand fully what a rogue he is, and how my Lord do
think and will think of him for the future; telling me that thus he
has served his father my Lord Manchester, and his whole family, and now
himself: and which is worst, that he hath abused, and in speeches every
day do abuse, my Lord Chancellor, whose favour he hath lost; and hath
no friend but Sir H. Bennet, and that (I knowing the rise of the
friendship) only from the likeness of their pleasures, and acquaintance,
and concernments, they have in the same matters of lust and baseness;
for which, God forgive them! But he do flatter himself, from promises of
Sir H. Bennet, that he shall have a pension of L2000 per annum, and be
made an Earl. My Lord told me he expected a challenge from him, but told
me there was no great fear of him, for there was no man lies under such
an imputation as he do in the business of Mr. Cholmely, who, though a
simple sorry fellow, do brave him and struts before him with the Queen,
to the sport and observation of the whole Court. He did keep my Lord at
the window, thus reviling and braving him above an hour, my Lady Wright
being by; but my Lord tells me she could not hear every word, but did
well know what their discourse was; she could hear enough to know that.
So that he commands me to keep it as the greatest secret in the world,
and bids me beware of speaking words against Mr. Montagu, for fear I
should suffer by his passion thereby. After he had told me this I took
coach and home, where I found my wife come home and in bed with her
sister in law in the chamber with her, she not being able to stay to see
the wassel, being so ill..., which I was sorry for. Hither we sent for
her sister’s viall, upon which she plays pretty well for a girl, but
my expectation is much deceived in her, not only for that, but in her
spirit, she being I perceive a very subtle witty jade, and one that will
give her husband trouble enough as little as she is, whereas I took her
heretofore for a very child and a simple fool. I played also, which I
have not done this long time before upon any instrument, and at last
broke up and I to my office a little while, being fearful of being too
much taken with musique, for fear of returning to my old dotage thereon,
and so neglect my business as I used to do. Then home and to bed. Coming
home I brought Mr. Pickering as far as the Temple, who tells me the
story is very true of a child being dropped at the ball at Court; and
that the King had it in his closett a week after, and did dissect it;
and making great sport of it, said that in his opinion it must have been
a month and three hours old; and that, whatever others think, he hath
the greatest loss (it being a boy, as he says), that hath lost a subject
by the business. He tells me, too, that the other story, of my Lady
Castlemaine’s and Stuart’s marriage, is certain, and that it was in
order to the King’s coming to Stuart, as is believed generally. He tells
me that Sir H. Bennet is a Catholique, and how all the Court almost is
changed to the worse since his coming in, they being afeard of him. And
that the Queen-Mother’s Court is now the greatest of all; and that our
own Queen hath little or no company come to her, which I know also to be
very true, and am sorry to see it.