27th. So I waked by 3 o’clock, my mind being troubled, and so took
occasion by making water to wake my wife, and after having lain till
past 4 o’clock seemed going to rise, though I did it only to see what
she would do, and so going out of the bed she took hold of me and would
know what ailed me, and after many kind and some cross words I began to
tax her discretion in yesterday’s business, but she quickly told me my
own, knowing well enough that it was my old disease of jealousy, which I
denied, but to no purpose. After an hour’s discourse, sometimes high and
sometimes kind, I found very good reason to think that her freedom with
him is very great and more than was convenient, but with no evil intent,
and so after awhile I caressed her and parted seeming friends, but she
crying in a great discontent. So I up and by water to the Temple, and
thence with Commissioner Pett to St. James’s, where an hour with Mr.
Coventry talking of Mr. Pett’s proceedings lately in the forest of
Sherwood, and thence with Pett to my Lord Ashley, Chancellor of the
Exchequer; where we met the auditors about settling the business of the
accounts of persons to whom money is due before the King’s time in the
Navy, and the clearing of their imprests for what little of their debts
they have received. I find my Lord, as he is reported, a very ready,
quick, and diligent person. Thence I to Westminster Hall, where Term and
Parliament make the Hall full of people; no further news yet of the King
of France, whether he be dead or not. Here I met with my cozen Roger
Pepys, and walked a good while with him, and among other discourse as a
secret he hath committed to nobody but myself, and he tells me that his
sister Claxton now resolving to give over the keeping of his house at
Impington, he thinks it fit to marry again, and would have me, by the
help of my uncle Wight or others, to look him out a widow between thirty
and forty years old, without children, and with a fortune, which he will
answer in any degree with a joynture fit for her fortune. A woman sober,
and no high-flyer, as he calls it. I demanded his estate. He tells me,
which he says also he hath not done to any, that his estate is not full
L800 per annum, but it is L780 per annum, of which L200 is by the death
of his last wife, which he will allot for a joynture for a wife, but the
rest, which lies in Cambridgeshire, he is resolved to leave entire for
his eldest son. I undertook to do what I can in it, and so I shall. He
tells me that the King hath sent to them to hasten to make an end by
midsummer, because of his going into the country; so they have set upon
four bills to dispatch: the first of which is, he says, too devilish a
severe act against conventicles; so beyond all moderation, that he is
afeard it will ruin all: telling me that it is matter of the greatest
grief to him in the world, that he should be put upon this trust of
being a Parliament-man, because he says nothing is done, that he can
see, out of any truth and sincerity, but mere envy and design. Thence
by water to Chelsey, all the way reading a little book I bought of
“Improvement of Trade,” a pretty book and many things useful in it. So
walked to Little Chelsey, where I found my Lord Sandwich with Mr. Becke,
the master of the house, and Mr. Creed at dinner, and I sat down with
them, and very merry. After dinner (Mr. Gibbons being come in also
before dinner done) to musique, they played a good Fancy, to which my
Lord is fallen again, and says he cannot endure a merry tune, which is
a strange turn of his humour, after he has for two or three years flung
off the practice of Fancies and played only fidlers’ tunes. Then into
the Great Garden up to the Banqueting House; and there by his glass we
drew in the species very pretty. Afterwards to ninepins, where I won a
shilling, Creed and I playing against my Lord and Cooke. This day there
was great thronging to Banstead Downs, upon a great horse-race and
foot-race. I am sorry I could not go thither. So home back as I came, to
London Bridge, and so home, where I find my wife in a musty humour, and
tells me before Ashwell that Pembleton had been there, and she would
not have him come in unless I was there, which I was ashamed of; but
however, I had rather it should be so than the other way. So to my
office, to put things in order there, and by and by comes Pembleton,
and word is brought me from my wife thereof that I might come home. So I
sent word that I would have her go dance, and I would come presently.
So being at a great loss whether I should appear to Pembleton or no, and
what would most proclaim my jealousy to him, I at last resolved to go
home, and took Tom Hater with me, and staid a good while in my chamber,
and there took occasion to tell him how I hear that Parliament is
putting an act out against all sorts of conventicles,

     [16 Car. II., cap. 4, “An Act to prevent and suppresse seditious
     Conventicles.”  It was enacted that anyone of the age of sixteen or
     upwards present at an unlawful assembly or conventicle was to incur
     fine or imprisonment.  A conventicle was defined as an assembly of
     more than five persons besides the members of a family met together
     for holding worship not according to the rites of the Church of
     England.  The act was amended 22 Car. II., cap. i (1670), and
     practically repealed by the Toleration Act of 1689, but the act 22
     Car. II., cap. i, was specially repealed 52 Geo. III., cap. 155, s.