22d (Lord’s day). Up betimes and in my office wrote out our bill for the
Parliament about our being made justices of Peace in the City. So home
and to church, where a dull formall fellow that prayed for the Right
Hon. John Lord Barkeley, Lord President of Connaught, &c. So home
to dinner, and after dinner my wife and I and her woman by coach to
Westminster, where being come too soon for the Christening we took up
Mr. Creed and went out to take some ayre, as far as Chelsey and further,
I lighting there and letting them go on with the coach while I went
to the church expecting to see the young ladies of the school, Ashwell
desiring me, but I could not get in far enough, and so came out and at
the coach’s coming back went in again and so back to Westminster, and
led my wife and her to Captain Ferrers, and I to my Lord Sandwich,
and with him talking a good while; I find the Court would have this
Indulgence go on, but the Parliament are against it. Matters in Ireland
are full of discontent. Thence with Mr. Creed to Captain Ferrers, where
many fine ladies; the house well and prettily furnished. She [Mrs.
Ferrers] lies in, in great state, Mr. G. Montagu, Collonel Williams,
Cromwell that was,

     [Colonel Williams--“Cromwell that was”--appears to have been Henry
     Cromwell, grandson of Sir Oliver Cromwell, and first cousin, once
     removed, to the Protector.  He was seated at Bodsey House, in the
     parish of Ramsey, which had been his father’s residence, and held
     the commission of a colonel.  He served in several Parliaments for
     Huntingdonshire, voting, in 1660, for the restoration of the
     monarchy; and as he knew the name of Cromwell would not be grateful
     to the Court, he disused it, and assumed that of Williams, which had
     belonged to his ancestors; and he is so styled in a list of knights
     of the proposed Order of the Royal Oak.  He died at Huntingdon, 3rd
     August, 1673.  (Abridged from Noble’s “Memoirs of the Cromwells,”
      vol. i., p. 70.)--B.]

and Mrs. Wright as proxy for my Lady Jemimah, were witnesses. Very
pretty and plentiful entertainment, could not get away till nine at
night, and so home. My coach cost me 7s. So to prayers, and to bed. This
day though I was merry enough yet I could not get yesterday’s quarrel
out of my mind, and a natural fear of being challenged by Holmes for
the words I did give him, though nothing but what did become me as a
principal officer.