9th (Lord’s day). Up, and leaving my brother John to go somewhere else,
I to church, and heard Mr. Mills (who is lately returned out of the
country, and it seems was fetched in by many of the parishioners, with
great state,) preach upon the authority of the ministers, upon these
words, “We are therefore embassadors of Christ.” Wherein, among other
high expressions, he said, that such a learned man used to say, that if
a minister of the word and an angell should meet him together, he would
salute the minister first; which methought was a little too high. This
day I begun to make use of the silver pen (Mr. Coventry did give me) in
writing of this sermon, taking only the heads of it in Latin, which
I shall, I think, continue to do. So home and at my office reading my
vowes, and so to Sir W. Batten to dinner, being invited and sent for,
and being willing to hear how they left things at Portsmouth, which I
found but ill enough, and are mightily for a Commissioner to be at seat
there to keep the yard in order. Thence in the afternoon with my Lady
Batten, leading her through the streets by the hand to St. Dunstan’s
Church, hard by us (where by Mrs. Russell’s means we were set well),
and heard an excellent sermon of one Mr. Gifford, the parson there, upon
“Remember Lot’s wife.” So from thence walked back to Mrs. Russell’s, and
there drank and sat talking a great while. Among other things talked of
young Dawes that married the great fortune, who it seems has a Baronet’s
patent given him, and is now Sir Thos. Dawes, and a very fine bred man
they say he is. Thence home, and my brother being abroad I walked to my
uncle Wight’s and there staid, though with little pleasure, and supped,
there being the husband of Mrs. Anne Wight, who it seems is lately
married to one Mr. Bentley, a Norwich factor. Home, and staid up a good
while examining Will in his Latin below, and my brother along with him
in his Greeke, and so to prayers and to bed. This afternoon I was amused
at the tune set to the Psalm by the Clerke of the parish, and thought
at first that he was out, but I find him to be a good songster, and the
parish could sing it very well, and was a good tune. But I wonder that
there should be a tune in the Psalms that I never heard of.