22nd (Lord’s day). Up pretty early, and having last night bespoke a
coach, which failed me this morning, I walked as far as the Temple, and
there took coach, and to my Lord’s lodgings, whom I found ready to go
to chappell; but I coming, he begun, with a very serious countenance,
to tell me that he had received my late letter, wherein first he took
notice of my care of him and his honour, and did give me thanks for that
part of it where I say that from my heart I believe the contrary of what
I do there relate to be the discourse of others; but since I intended
it not a reproach, but matter of information, and for him to make a
judgment of it for his practice, it was necessary for me to tell him the
persons of whom I have gathered the several particulars which I there
insist on. I would have made excuses in it; but, seeing him so earnest
in it, I found myself forced to it, and so did tell him Mr. Pierce;
the chyrurgeon, in that of his Lordship’s living being discoursed of at
Court; a mayd servant that-I kept, that lived at Chelsy school; and also
Mr. Pickering, about the report touching the young woman; and also Mr.
Hunt, in Axe Yard, near whom she lodged. I told him the whole city
do discourse concerning his neglect of business; and so I many times
asserting my dutifull intention in all this, and he owning his accepting
of it as such. That that troubled me most in particular is, that he
did there assert the civility of the people of the house, and the young
gentlewoman, for whose reproach he was sorry. His saying that he was
resolved how to live, and that though he was taking a house, meaning to
live in another manner, yet it was not to please any people, or to stop
report, but to please himself, though this I do believe he might say
that he might not seem to me to be so much wrought upon by what I have
writ; and lastly, and most of all, when I spoke of the tenderness that
I have used in declaring this to him, there being nobody privy to it,
he told me that I must give him leave to except one. I told him that
possibly somebody might know of some thoughts of mine, I having borrowed
some intelligence in this matter from them, but nobody could say they
knew of the thing itself what I writ. This, I confess, however, do
trouble me, for that he seemed to speak it as a quick retort, and it
must sure be Will. Howe, who did not see anything of what I writ, though
I told him indeed that I would write; but in this, I think, there is no
great hurt. I find him, though he cannot but owne his opinion of my
good intentions, and so, he did again and again profess it, that he
is troubled in his mind at it; and I confess, I think I may have done
myself an injury for his good, which, were it to do again, and that
I believed he would take it no better, I think I should sit quietly
without taking any notice of it, for I doubt there is no medium between
his taking it very well or very ill. I could not forbear weeping before
him at the latter end, which, since, I am ashamed of, though I cannot
see what he can take it to proceed from but my tenderness and good
will to him. After this discourse was ended, he began to talk very,
cheerfully of other things, and I walked with him to White Hall, and we
discoursed of the pictures in the gallery, which, it may be, he might do
out of policy, that the boy might not see any, strangeness in him; but I
rather think that his mind was somewhat eased, and hope that he will be
to me as he was before. But, however, I doubt not when he sees that I
follow my business, and become an honour to him, and not to be like to
need him, or to be a burden to him, and rather able to serve him than to
need him, and if he do continue to follow business, and so come to
his right witts again, I do not doubt but he will then consider my
faithfulnesse to him, and esteem me as he ought. At chappell I had
room in the Privy Seale pew with other gentlemen, and there heard Dr.
Killigrew, preach, but my mind was so, I know not whether troubled, or
only full of thoughts of what had passed between my Lord and me that I
could not mind it, nor can at this hour remember three words. The anthem
was good after sermon, being the fifty-first psalme, made for five
voices by one of Captain Cooke’s boys, a pretty boy. And they say there
are four or five of them that can do as much. And here I first perceived
that the King is a little musicall, and kept good time with his hand
all along the anthem. Up into the gallery after sermon and there I met
Creed. We saluted one another and spoke but not one word of what had
passed yesterday between us, but told me he was forced to such a place
to dinner and so we parted. Here I met Mr. Povy, who tells me how
Tangier had like to have been betrayed, and that one of the King’s
officers is come, to whom 8,000 pieces of eight were offered for his
part. Hence I to the King’s Head ordinary, and there dined, good and
much company, and a good dinner: most of their discourse was about
hunting, in a dialect I understand very little. Thence by coach to our
own church, and there my mind being yet unsettled I could mind nothing,
and after sermon home and there told my wife what had passed, and thence
to my office, where doing business only to keep my mind employed till
late; and so home to supper, to prayers, and to bed.