31st. Up early to my accounts this month, and I find myself worth clear
L730, the most I ever had yet, which contents me though I encrease but
very little. Thence to my office doing business, and at noon to my
viall maker’s, who has begun it and has a good appearance, and so to the
Exchange, where I met Dr. Pierce, who tells me of his good luck to
get to be groom of the Privy-Chamber to the Queen, and without my Lord
Sandwich’s help; but only by his good fortune, meeting a man that hath
let him have his right for a small matter, about L60, for which he can
every day have L400. But he tells me my Lord hath lost much honour in
standing so long and so much for that coxcomb Pickering, and at last not
carrying it for him; but hath his name struck out by the King and Queen
themselves after he had been in ever since the Queen’s coming. But he
tells me he believes that either Sir H. Bennet, my Lady Castlemaine, or
Sir Charles Barkeley had received some money for the place, and so the
King could not disappoint them, but was forced to put out this fool
rather than a better man. And I am sorry to hear what he tells me that
Sir Charles Barkeley hath still such power over the King, as to be
able to fetch him from the Council-table to my Lady Castlemaine when he
pleases. He tells me also, as a friend, the great injury that he
thinks I do myself by being so severe in the Yards, and contracting the
ill-will of the whole Navy for those offices, singly upon myself. Now I
discharge a good conscience therein, and I tell him that no man can (nor
do he say any say it) charge me with doing wrong; but rather do as many
good offices as any man. They think, he says, that I have a mind to get
a good name with the King and Duke, who he tells me do not consider any
such thing; but I shall have as good thanks to let all alone, and do as
the rest. But I believe the contrary; and yet I told him I never go to
the Duke alone, as others do, to talk of my own services. However, I
will make use of his council, and take some course to prevent having the
single ill-will of the office. Before I went to the office I went to
the Coffee House, where Sir J. Cutler and Mr. Grant were, and there Mr.
Grant showed me letters of Sir William Petty’s, wherein he says, that
his vessel which he hath built upon two keeles (a modell whereof,
built for the King, he showed me) hath this month won a wager of L50
in sailing between Dublin and Holyhead with the pacquett-boat, the best
ship or vessel the King hath there; and he offers to lay with any vessel
in the world. It is about thirty ton in burden, and carries thirty men,
with good accommodation, (as much more as any ship of her burden,)
and so any vessel of this figure shall carry more men, with better
accommodation by half, than any other ship. This carries also ten guns,
of about five tons weight. In their coming back from Holyhead they
started together, and this vessel came to Dublin by five at night, and
the pacquett-boat not before eight the next morning; and when they came
they did believe that, this vessel had been drowned, or at least behind,
not thinking she could have lived in that sea. Strange things are told
of this vessel, and he concludes his letter with this position, “I only
affirm that the perfection of sayling lies in my principle, finde it
out who can.” Thence home, in my way meeting Mr. Rawlinson, who tells me
that my uncle Wight is off of his Hampshire purchase and likes less of
the Wights, and would have me to be kind and study to please him, which
I am resolved to do. Being at home he sent for me to dinner to meet Mr.
Moore, so I went thither and dined well, but it was strange for me to
refuse, and yet I did without any reluctancy to drink wine in a tavern,
where nothing else almost was drunk, and that excellent good. Thence
with Mr. Moore to the Wardrobe, and there sat while my Lord was private
with Mr. Townsend about his accounts an hour or two, we reading of a
merry book against the Presbyters called Cabbala, extraordinary witty.
Thence walked home and to my office, setting papers of all sorts and
writing letters and putting myself into a condition to go to Chatham
with Mr. Coventry to-morrow. So, at almost 12 o’clock, and my eyes tired
with seeing to write, I went home and to bed. Ending the month with
pretty good content of mind, my wife in the country and myself in good
esteem, and likely by pains to become considerable, I think, with God’s
blessing upon my diligence.