9th. Up by break of day, and then to my vials a while, and so to Sir W.
Warren’s by agreement, and after talking and eating something with him,
he and I down by water to Woolwich, and there I did several businesses,
and had good discourse, and thence walked to Greenwich; in my way a
little boy overtook us with a fine cupp turned out of Lignum Vitae,
which the poor child confessed was made in the King’s yard by his
father, a turner there, and that he do often do it, and that I might
have one, and God knows what, which I shall examine. Thence to Sir W.
Warren’s again, and there drew up a contract for masts which he is to
sell us, and so home to dinner, finding my poor wife busy. I, after
dinner, to the office, and then to White Hall, to Sir G. Carteret’s,
but did not speak with him, and so to Westminster Hall, God forgive me,
thinking to meet Mrs. Lane, but she was not there, but here I met with
Ned Pickering, with whom I walked 3 or 4 hours till evening, he telling
me the whole business of my Lord’s folly with this Mrs. Becke, at
Chelsey, of all which I am ashamed to see my Lord so grossly play the
beast and fool, to the flinging off of all honour, friends, servants,
and every thing and person that is good, and only will have his private
lust undisturbed with this common.... his sitting up night after night
alone, suffering nobody to come to them, and all the day too, casting
off Pickering, basely reproaching him with his small estate, which yet
is a good one, and other poor courses to obtain privacy beneath his
honour, and with his carrying her abroad and playing on his lute under
her window, and forty other poor sordid things, which I am grieved to
hear; but believe it to no purpose for me to meddle with it, but let him
go on till God Almighty and his own conscience and thoughts of his lady
and family do it. So after long discourse, to my full satisfaction but
great trouble, I home by water and at my office late, and so to supper
to my poor wife, and so to bed, being troubled to think that I shall be
forced to go to Brampton the next Court, next week.