7th. Up by 4 o’clock and to my office, and there continued all the
morning upon my Navy book to my great content. At noon down by barge
with Sir J. Minnes (who is going to Chatham) to Woolwich, in our way
eating of some venison pasty in the barge, I having neither eat nor
drank to-day, which fills me full of wind. Here also in Mr. Pett’s
garden I eat some and the first cherries I have eat this year, off the
tree where the King himself had been gathering some this morning. Thence
walked alone, only part of the way Deane walked with me, complaining
of many abuses in the Yard, to Greenwich, and so by water to Deptford,
where I found Mr. Coventry, and with him up and down all the stores, to
the great trouble of the officers, and by his help I am resolved to fall
hard to work again, as I used to do. So thence he and I by water talking
of many things, and I see he puts his trust most upon me in the Navy,
and talks, as there is reason, slightly of the two old knights, and
I should be glad by any drudgery to see the King’s stores and service
looked to as they ought, but I fear I shall never understand half the
miscarriages and tricks that the King suffers by. He tells me what
Mr. Pett did to-day, that my Lord Bristoll told the King that he will
impeach the Chancellor of High Treason: but I find that my Lord
Bristoll hath undone himself already in every body’s opinion, and now
he endeavours to raise dust to put out other men’s eyes, as well as his
own; but I hope it will not take, in consideration merely that it is
hard for a Prince to spare an experienced old officer, be he never so
corrupt; though I hope this man is not so, as some report him to be. He
tells me that Don John is yet alive, and not killed, as was said, in the
great victory against the Spaniards in Portugall of late. So home,
and late at my office. Thence home and to my musique. This night Mr.
Turner’s house being to be emptied out of my cellar, and therefore I
think to sit up a little longer than ordinary. This afternoon, coming
from the waterside with Mr. Coventry, I spied my boy upon Tower Hill
playing with the rest of the boys; so I sent W. Griffin to take him, and
he did bring him to me, and so I said nothing to him, but caused him to
be stripped (for he was run away with his best suit), and so putting on
his other, I sent him going, without saying one word hard to him, though
I am troubled for the rogue, though he do not deserve it. Being come
home I find my stomach not well for want of eating to-day my dinner as
I should do, and so am become full of wind. I called late for some
victuals, and so to bed, leaving the men below in the cellar emptying
the vats up through Mr. Turner’s own house, and so with more content to
bed late.