7th. Up betimes, and, it being a frosty morning, walked on foot to White
Hall, but not without some fear of my pain coming. At White Hall I hear
and find that there was the last night the greatest tide that ever was
remembered in England to have been in this river: all White Hall having
been drowned, of which there was great discourse. Anon we all met, and
up with the Duke and did our business, and by and by my Lord of Sandwich
came in, but whether it be my doubt or no I cannot tell, but I do not
find that he made any sign of kindnesse or respect to me, which troubles
me more than any thing in the world. After done there Sir W. Batten and
Captain Allen and I by coach to the Temple, where I ‘light, they going
home, and indeed it being my trouble of mind to try whether I could meet
with my Lord Sandwich and try him to see how he will receive me. I took
coach and back again to Whitehall, but there could not find him. But
here I met Dr. Clerke, and did tell him my story of my health; how my
pain comes to me now-a-days. He did write something for me which I
shall take when there is occasion. I then fell to other discourse of
Dr. Knapp, who tells me he is the King’s physician, and is become a
solicitor for places for people, and I am mightily troubled with him. He
tells me he is the most impudent fellow in the world, that gives himself
out to be the King’s physician, but it is not so, but is cast out of the
Court. From thence I may learn what impudence there is in the world,
and how a man may be deceived in persons: Anon the King and Duke and
Duchesse came to dinner in the Vane-roome, where I never saw them
before; but it seems since the tables are done, he dines there all
together. The Queene is pretty well, and goes out of her chamber to her
little chappell in the house. The King of France, they say, is hiring of
sixty sail of ships of the Dutch, but it is not said for what design. By
and by, not hoping to see my Lord, I went to the King’s Head ordinary,
where a good dinner but no discourse almost, and after dinner by coach,
home, and found my wife this cold day not yet out of bed, and after a
little good talk with her to my office, and there spent my time till
late. Sir W. Warren two or three hours with me talking of trade, and
other very good discourse, which did please me very, well, and so, after
reading in Rushworth, home to supper and to bed.