28th. Up and all the morning at my office doing business, and at home
seeing my painters’ work measured. So to dinner and abroad with my
wife, carrying her to Unthank’s, where she alights, and I to my Lord
Sandwich’s, whom I find missing his ague fit to-day, and is pretty well,
playing at dice (and by this I see how time and example may alter a man;
he being now acquainted with all sorts of pleasures and vanities, which
heretofore he never thought of nor loved, nor, it may be, hath allowed)
with Ned Pickering and his page Laud. Thence to the Temple to my cozen
Roger Pepys, and thence to Serjt. Bernard to advise with him and retain
him against my uncle, my heart and head being very heavy with the
business. Thence to Wotton’s, the shoemaker, and there bought another
pair of new boots, for the other I bought my last would not fit me, and
here I drank with him and his wife, a pretty woman, they broaching a
vessel of syder a-purpose for me. So home, and there found my wife come
home, and seeming to cry; for bringing home in a coach her new ferrandin

     [Ferrandin, which was sometimes spelt farendon, was a stuff made of
     silk mixed with some other material, like what is now called poplin.
     Both mohair and farendon are generally cheap materials; for in the
     case of Manby v. Scott, decided in the Exchequer Chamber in 1663,
     and reported in the first volume of “Modern Reports,” the question
     being as to the liability of a husband to pay for goods supplied
     against his consent to his wife, who had separated from him, Mr.
     Justice Hyde (whose judgment is most amusing) observes, in putting
     various supposed cases, that “The wife will have a velvet gown and a
     satin petticoat, and the husband thinks a mohair or farendon for a
     gown, and watered tabby for a petticoat, is as fashionable, and
     fitter for her quality.”--B.]

waistecoate, in Cheapside, a man asked her whether that was the way to
the Tower; and while she was answering him, another, on the other side,
snatched away her bundle out of her lap, and could not be recovered, but
ran away with it, which vexes me cruelly, but it cannot be helped. So to
my office, and there till almost 12 at night with Mr. Lewes, learning
to understand the manner of a purser’s account, which is very hard and
little understood by my fellow officers, and yet mighty necessary. So at
last with great content broke up and home to supper and bed.