26th. Lay long in bed talking and pleasing myself with my wife. So up
and to my office a while and then home, where I found Pembleton, and
by many circumstances I am led to conclude that there is something more
than ordinary between my wife and him, which do so trouble me that I
know not at this very minute that I now write this almost what either
I write or am doing, nor how to carry myself to my wife in it, being
unwilling to speak of it to her for making of any breach and other
inconveniences, nor let it pass for fear of her continuing to offend
me and the matter grow worse thereby. So that I am grieved at the very
heart, but I am very unwise in being so. There dined with me Mr. Creed
and Captain Grove, and before dinner I had much discourse in my chamber
with Mr. Deane, the builder of Woolwich, about building of ships. But
nothing could get the business out of my head, I fearing that this
afternoon by my wife’s sending every [one] abroad and knowing that I
must be at the office she has appointed him to come. This is my devilish
jealousy, which I pray God may be false, but it makes a very hell in my
mind, which the God of heaven remove, or I shall be very unhappy. So
to the office, where we sat awhile. By and by my mind being in great
trouble I went home to see how things were, and there I found as I
doubted Mr. Pembleton with my wife, and nobody else in the house, which
made me almost mad, and going up to my chamber after a turn or two I
went out again and called somebody on pretence of business and left him
in my little room at the door (it was the Dutchman, commander of the
King’s pleasure boats, who having been beat by one of his men sadly, was
come to the office to-day to complain) telling him I would come again to
him to speak with him about his business. So in great trouble and doubt
to the office, and Mr. Coventry nor Sir G. Carteret being there I made a
quick end of our business and desired leave to be gone, pretending to go
to the Temple, but it was home, and so up to my chamber, and as I think
if they had any intention of hurt I did prevent doing anything at that
time, but I continued in my chamber vexed and angry till he went away,
pretending aloud, that I might hear, that he could not stay, and Mrs.
Ashwell not being within they could not dance. And, Lord! to see how my
jealousy wrought so far that I went softly up to see whether any of
the beds were out of order or no, which I found not, but that did not
content me, but I staid all the evening walking, and though anon my wife
came up to me and would have spoke of business to me, yet I construed
it to be but impudence, and though my heart full yet I did say nothing,
being in a great doubt what to do. So at night, suffered them to go all
to bed, and late put myself to bed in great discontent, and so to sleep.