29th. Up betimes, and after having at my office settled some accounts
for my Lord Sandwich, I went forth, and taking up my father at my
brother’s, took coach and towards Chelsey, ‘lighting at an alehouse near
the Gatehouse at Westminster to drink our morning draught, and so up
again and to Chelsey, where we found my Lord all alone at a little table
with one joynt of meat at dinner; we sat down and very merry talking,
and mightily extolling the manner of his retirement, and the goodness of
his diet, which indeed is so finely dressed: the mistress of the
house, Mrs. Becke, having been a woman of good condition heretofore,
a merchant’s wife, and hath all things most excellently dressed; among
others, her cakes admirable, and so good that my Lord’s words were, they
were fit to present to my Lady Castlemaine. From ordinary discourse my
Lord fell to talk of other matters to me, of which chiefly the second
part of the fray, which he told me a little while since of, between Mr.
Edward Montagu and himself, which is that after that he had since
been with him three times and no notice taken at all of any difference
between them, and yet since that he hath forborn coming to him almost
two months, and do speak not only slightly of my Lord every where, but
hath complained to my Lord Chancellor of him, and arrogated all that
ever my Lord hath done to be only by his direction and persuasion.
Whether he hath done the like to the King or no, my Lord knows not; but
my Lord hath been with the King since, and finds all things fair; and
my Lord Chancellor hath told him of it, but with so much contempt of Mr.
Montagu, as my Lord knows himself very secure against any thing the fool
can do; and notwithstanding all this, so noble is his nature, that he
professes himself ready to show kindness and pity to Mr. Montagu on any
occasion. My Lord told me of his presenting Sir H. Bennet with a gold
cupp of L100, which he refuses, with a compliment; but my Lord would
have been glad he had taken it, that he might have had some obligations
upon him which he thinks possible the other may refuse to prevent it;
not that he hath any reason to doubt his kindness. But I perceive great
differences there are at Court; and Sir H. Bennet and my Lord Bristol,
and their faction, are likely to carry all things before them (which my
Lord’s judgment is, will not be for the best), and particularly against
the Chancellor, who, he tells me, is irrecoverably lost: but, however,
that he will not actually joyne in anything against the Chancellor, whom
he do own to be his most sure friend, and to have been his greatest;
and therefore will not openly act in either, but passively carry himself
even. The Queen, my Lord tells me, he thinks he hath incurred
some displeasure with, for his kindness to his neighbour, my Lady
Castlemaine. My Lord tells me he hath no reason to fall for her sake,
whose wit, management, nor interest, is not likely to hold up any man,
and therefore he thinks it not his obligation to stand for her against
his own interest. The Duke and Mr. Coventry my Lord says he is very well
with, and fears not but they will show themselves his very good friends,
specially at this time, he being able to serve them, and they needing
him, which he did not tell me wherein. Talking of the business of
Tangier, he tells me that my Lord Tiviott is gone away without the least
respect paid to him, nor indeed to any man, but without his commission;
and (if it be true what he says) having laid out seven or eight thousand
pounds in commodities for the place; and besides having not only
disobliged all the Commissioners for Tangier, but also Sir Charles
Barkeley the other day, who, speaking in behalf of Colonel Fitz-Gerald,
that having been deputy-governor there already, he ought to have
expected and had the governorship upon the death or removal of the
former governor. And whereas it is said that he and his men are Irish,
which is indeed the main thing that hath moved the King and Council
to put in Tiviott to prevent the Irish having too great and the whole
command there under Fitz-Gerald; he further said that there was never
an Englishman fit to command Tangier; my Lord Tiviott answered yes, that
there were many more fit than himself or Fitz-Gerald either. So that
Fitz-Gerald being so great with the Duke of York, and being already made
deputy-governor, independent of my Lord Tiviott, and he being also left
here behind him for a while, my Lord Sandwich do think that, putting all
these things together, the few friends he hath left, and the ill
posture of his affairs, my Lord Tiviott is not a man of the conduct and
management that either people take him to be, or is fit for the command
of the place. And here, speaking of the Duke of York and Sir Charles
Barkeley, my Lord tells me that he do very much admire the good
management, and discretion, and nobleness of the Duke, that whatever
he may be led by him or Mr. Coventry singly in private, yet he did not
observe that in publique matters, but he did give as ready hearing and
as good acceptance to any reasons offered by any other man against the
opinions of them, as he did to them, and would concur in the prosecution
of it. Then we came to discourse upon his own sea accompts, and came
to a resolution what and how to proceed in them; wherein he resolved,
though I offered him a way of evading the greatest part of his debt
honestly, by making himself debtor to the Parliament, before the King’s
time, which he might justly do, yet he resolved to go openly and nakedly
in it, and put himself to the kindness of the King and Duke, which
humour, I must confess, and so did tell him (with which he was not a
little pleased) had thriven very well with him, being known to be a man
of candid and open dealing, without any private tricks or hidden designs
as other men commonly have in what they do. From that we had discourse
of Sir G. Carteret, who he finds kind to him, but it may be a little
envious, and most other men are, and of many others; and upon the whole
do find that it is a troublesome thing for a man of any condition at
Court to carry himself even, and without contracting enemys or envyers;
and that much discretion and dissimulation is necessary to do it. My
father staid a good while at the window and then sat down by himself
while my Lord and I were thus an hour together or two after dinner
discoursing, and by and by he took his leave, and told me he would
stay below for me. Anon I took leave, and coming down found my father
unexpectedly in great pain and desiring for God’s sake to get him a bed
to lie upon, which I did, and W. Howe and I staid by him, in so great
pain as I never saw, poor wretch, and with that patience, crying only:
Terrible, terrible pain, God help me, God help me, with the mournful
voice, that made my heart ake. He desired to rest a little alone to see
whether it would abate, and W. Howe and I went down and walked in the
gardens, which are very fine, and a pretty fountayne, with which I was
finely wetted, and up to a banquetting house, with a very fine prospect,
and so back to my father, who I found in such pain that I could not bear
the sight of it without weeping, never thinking that I should be able to
get him from thence, but at last, finding it like to continue, I got him
to go to the coach, with great pain, and driving hard, he all the while
in a most unsufferable torment (meeting in the way with Captain Ferrers
going to my Lord, to tell him that my Lady Jemimah is come to town,
and that Will Stankes is come with my father’s horses), not staying the
coach to speak with any body, but once, in St. Paul’s Churchyard, we
were forced to stay, the jogging and pain making my father vomit, which
it never had done before. At last we got home, and all helping him we
got him to bed presently, and after half an hour’s lying in his naked
bed (it being a rupture [with] which he is troubled, and has been this