25th. Up very early and removed the things out of my chamber into the
dining room, it being to be new floored this day. So the workmen being
come and falling to work there, I to the office, and thence down to
Lymehouse to Phin. Pett’s about masts, and so back to the office, where
we sat; and being rose, and Mr. Coventry being gone, taking his leave,
for that he is to go to the Bath with the Duke to-morrow, I to the
‘Change and there spoke with several persons, and lastly with Sir W.
Warren, and with him to a Coffee House, and there sat two hours talking
of office business and Mr. Wood’s knavery, which I verily believe, and
lastly he tells me that he hears that Captain Cocke is like to become a
principal officer, either a Controller or a Surveyor, at which I am not
sorry so either of the other may be gone, and I think it probable enough
that it may be so. So home at 2 o’clock, and there I found Ashwell gone,
and her wages come to 50s., and my wife, by a mistake from me, did give
her 20s. more; but I am glad that she is gone and the charge saved.
After dinner among my joyners, and with them till dark night, and this
night they made an end of all; and so having paid them 40s. for their
six days’ work, I am glad they have ended and are gone, for I am weary
and my wife too of this dirt. My wife growing peevish at night, being
weary, and I a little vexed to see that she do not retain things in her
memory that belong to the house as she ought and I myself do, I went out
in a little seeming discontent to the office, and after being there a
while, home to supper and to bed. To-morrow they say the King and the
Duke set out for the Bath. This noon going to the Exchange, I met a fine
fellow with trumpets before him in Leadenhall-street, and upon enquiry
I find that he is the clerk of the City Market; and three or four men
carried each of them an arrow of a pound weight in their hands. It seems
this Lord Mayor begins again an old custome, that upon the three first
days of Bartholomew Fayre, the first, there is a match of wrestling,
which was done, and the Lord Mayor there and Aldermen in Moorefields
yesterday: to-day, shooting: and to-morrow, hunting. And this officer of
course is to perform this ceremony of riding through the city, I think
to proclaim or challenge any to shoot. It seems that the people of the
fayre cry out upon it as a great hindrance to them.