30th. Up betimes yesterday and to-day, the sun rising very bright and
glorious; and yet yesterday, as it hath been these two months and more,
was a foul day the most part of the day. By and by by water to White
Hall, and there to my Lord’s lodgings by appointment, whither Mr. Creed
comes to me, having been at Chelsey this morning to fetch my Lord to St.
James’s. So he and I to the Park, where we understand that the King and
Duke are gone out betimes this morning on board the East India ships
lately come in, and so our meeting appointed is lost. But he and I
walked at the further end of the Park, not to be observed, whither by
and by comes my Lord Sandwich, and he and we walked two hours and more
in the Park and then in White Hall Gallery, and lastly in White Hall
garden, discoursing of Mr. Creed’s accounts, and how to answer the
Treasurer’s objections. I find that the business is L500 deep, the
advantage of Creed, and why my Lord and I should be concerned to promote
his profit with so much dishonour and trouble to us I know not, but
however we shall do what we can, though he deserves it not, for there
is nothing even to his own advantage that can be got out of him, but
by mere force. So full of policy he is in the smallest matters, that I
perceive him to be made up of nothing but design. I left him here, being
in my mind vexed at the trouble that this business gets me, and the
distance that it makes between Sir G. Carteret and myself, which I ought
to avoyd. Thence by water home and to dinner, and afterwards to the
office, and there sat till evening, and then I by water to Deptford to
see Sir W. Pen, who lies ill at Captain Rooth’s, but in a way to be well
again this weather, this day being the only fair day we have had these
two or three months. Among other discourse I did tell him plainly some
of my thoughts concerning Sir W. Batten. and the office in general, upon
design for him to understand that I do mind things and will not balk to
take notice of them, that when he comes to be well again he may know how
to look upon me. Thence homeward walked, and in my way met Creed coming
to meet me, and then turned back and walk a while, and so to boat and
home by water, I being not very forward to talk of his business, and he
by design the same, to see how I would speak of it, but I did not, but
in general terms, and so after supper with general discourse to bed and
sleep. Thus, by God’s blessing, ends this book of two years; I being
in all points in good health and a good way to thrive and do well. Some
money I do and can lay up, but not much, being worth now above L700,
besides goods of all sorts. My wife in the country with Ashwell, her
woman, with my father; myself at home with W. Hewer and my cooke-maid
Hannah, my boy Wayneman being lately run away from me. In my office,
my repute and understanding good, especially with the Duke and Mr.
Coventry; only the rest of the officers do rather envy than love me, I
standing in most of their lights, specially Sir W. Batten, whose cheats
I do daily oppose to his great trouble, though he appears mighty kind
and willing to keep friendship with me, while Sir J. Minnes, like a
dotard, is led by the nose by him. My wife and I, by my late jealousy,
for which I am truly to be blamed, have not the kindness between us
which we used and ought to have, and I fear will be lost hereafter if I
do not take course to oblige her and yet preserve my authority. Publique
matters are in an ill condition; Parliament sitting and raising four
subsidys for the King, which is but a little, considering his wants; and
yet that parted withal with great hardness. They being offended to see
so much money go, and no debts of the publique’s paid, but all swallowed
by a luxurious Court: which the King it is believed and hoped will
retrench in a little time, when he comes to see the utmost of the
revenue which shall be settled on him: he expecting to have his
L1,200,000 made good to him, which is not yet done by above L150,000, as
he himself reports to the House. My differences with my uncle Thomas at
a good quiett, blessed be God! and other matters. The town full of the
great overthrow lately given to the Spaniards by the Portugalls, they
being advanced into the very middle of Portugall. The weather wet for
two or three months together beyond belief, almost not one fair day
coming between till this day, which has been a very pleasant [day] and
the first pleasant [day] this summer. The charge of the Navy intended to
be limited to L200,000 per annum, the ordinary charge of it, and that
to be settled upon the Customs. The King yet greatly taken up with Madam
Castlemaine and Mrs. Stewart, which God of Heaven put an end to! Myself
very studious to learn what I can of all things necessary for my place
as an officer of the Navy, reading lately what concerns measuring of
timber and knowledge of the tides. I have of late spent much time with
Creed, being led to it by his business of his accounts, but I find him
a fellow of those designs and tricks, that there is no degree of true
friendship to be made with him, and therefore I must cast him off,
though he be a very understanding man, and one that much may be learned
of as to cunning and judging of other men. Besides, too, I do perceive
more and more that my time of pleasure and idleness of any sort must
be flung off to attend to getting of some money and the keeping of my
family in order, which I fear by my wife’s liberty may be otherwise
lost.