23rd. Up and hastened him in despatching some business relating to
Tangier, and I away homewards, hearing that my Lord had a bad fit
to-night, called at my brother’s, and found him sick in bed, of a pain
in the sole of one of his feet, without swelling, knowing not how it
came, but it will not suffer him to stand these two days. So to Mr.
Moore, and Mr. Lovell, our proctor, being there, discoursed of my law
business. Thence to Mr. Grant, to bid him come for money for Mr. Barlow,
and he and I to a coffee-house, where Sir J. Cutler was;

     [Citizen and grocer of London; most severely handled by Pope.  Two
     statues were erected to his memory--one in the College of
     Physicians, and the other in the Grocers’ Hall.  They were erected
     and one removed (that in the College of Physicians) before Pope
     stigmatized “sage Cutler.”  Pope says that Sir John Cutler had an
     only daughter; in fact, he had two: one married to Lord Radnor; the
     other, mentioned afterwards by Pepys, the wife of Sir William
     Portman.--B.]

and in discourse, among other things, he did fully make it out that the
trade of England is as great as ever it was, only in more hands; and
that of all trades there is a greater number than ever there was, by
reason of men taking more ‘prentices, because of their having more money
than heretofore. His discourse was well worth hearing. Coming by Temple
Bar I bought “Audley’s Way to be Rich,” a serious pamphlett and some
good things worth my minding. Thence homewards, and meeting Sir W.
Batten, turned back again to a coffee-house, and there drunk more till I
was almost sick, and here much discourse, but little to be learned, but
of a design in the north of a rising, which is discovered, among some
men of condition, and they sent for up. Thence to the ‘Change, and so
home with him by coach, and I to see how my wife do, who is pretty well
again, and so to dinner to Sir W. Batten’s to a cod’s head, and so to
my office, and after stopping to see Sir W. Pen, where was Sir J. Lawson
and his lady and daughter, which is pretty enough, I came back to my
office, and there set to business pretty late, finishing the margenting
my Navy-Manuscript. So home and to bed.