2nd. Up betimes and by water to St. James’s, and there visited Mr.
Coventry as a compliment after his new coming to town, but had no
great talk with him, he being full of business. So back by foot through
London, doing several errands, and at the ‘Change met with Mr. Cutler,
and he and I to a coffee-house, and there discoursed, and he do assure
me that there is great likelyhood of a war with Holland, but I hope
we shall be in good condition before it comes to break out. I like his
company, and will make much of his acquaintance. So home to dinner with
my wife, who is over head and eares in getting her house up, and so to
the office, and with Mr. Lewes, late, upon some of the old victuallers’
accounts, and so home to supper and to bed, up to our red chamber, where
we purpose always to lie. This day I received a letter from Mr. Barlow,
with a Terella,

     [Professor Silvanus P. Thompson, F.R.S., has kindly supplied me with
     the following interesting note on the terrella (or terella): The
     name given by Dr. William Gilbert, author of the famous treatise,
     “De Magnete” (Lond.  1600), to a spherical loadstone, on account of
     its acting as a model, magnetically, of the earth; compass-needles
     pointing to its poles, as mariners’ compasses do to the poles of
     the earth.  The term was adopted by other writers who followed
     Gilbert, as the following passage from Wm.  Barlowe’s “Magneticall
     Advertisements” (Lond.  1616) shows: “Wherefore the round Loadstone
     is significantly termed by Doct. Gilbert Terrella, that is, a
     little, or rather a very little Earth: For it representeth in an
     exceeding small model (as it were) the admirable properties
     magneticall of the huge Globe of the earth” (op. cit, p. 55).
     Gilbert set great store by his invention of the terrella, since it
     led him to propound the true theory of the mariners’ compass.  In
     his portrait of himself which he had painted for the University of
     Oxford he was represented as holding in his hand a globe inscribed
     terella.  In the Galileo Museum in Florence there is a terrella
     twenty-seven inches in diameter, of loadstone from Elba, constructed
     for Cosmo de’ Medici.  A smaller one contrived by Sir Christopher
     Wren was long preserved in the museum of the Royal Society (Grew’s
     “Rarities belonging to the Royal Society,” p.  364).  Evelyn was
     shown “a pretty terrella described with all ye circles and skewing
     all y magnetic deviations” (Diary, July 3rd, 1655).]

which I had hoped he had sent me, but to my trouble I find it is to
present from him to my Lord Sandwich, but I will make a little use of it
first, and then give it him.