7th. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and Sir W. Pen
and I had a word or two, where by opposing him in not being willing to
excuse a mulct put upon the purser of the James, absent from duty, he
says, by his business and order, he was mighty angry, and went out of
the office like an asse discontented: At which I am never a whit sorry;
I would not have [him] think that I dare not oppose him, where I see
reason and cause for it. Home to dinner, and then by coach abroad about
several businesses to several places, among others to Westminster Hall,
where, seeing Howlett’s daughter going out of the other end of the Hall,
I followed her if I would to have offered talk to her and dallied with
her a little, but I could not overtake her. Then calling at Unthank’s
for something of my wife’s not done, a pretty little gentlewoman, a
lodger there, came out to tell me that it was not yet done, which though
it vexed me yet I took opportunity of taking her by the hand with the
boot, and so found matter to talk a little the longer to her, but I
was ready to laugh at myself to see how my anger would not operate,
my disappointment coming to me by such a messenger. Thence to Doctors’
Commons and there consulted Dr. Turner about some differences we have
with the officers of the East India ships about goods brought by them
without paying freight, which we demand of them. So home to my office,
and there late writing letters, and so home to supper and to bed, having
got a scurvy cold by lying cold in my head the last night. This day
Captain Taylor brought me a piece of plate, a little small state dish,
he expecting that I should get him some allowance for demorage

     [“‘Demurrage’ is the compensation due to a shipowner from a
     freighter for unduly decaying his vessel in port beyond the time
     specified in the charter-party or bill of lading.  It is in fact an
     extended freight.  A ship, unjustly detained as a prize is entitled
     to ‘demurrage.’”--Smyth’s Sailor’s Word-Book, 1867.]

of his ship “William,” kept long at Tangier, which I shall and may
justly do.