24th. Up pretty early (though of late I have been faulty by an hour or
two every morning of what I should do) and by water to the Temple, and
there took leave of my cozen Roger Pepys, who goes out of town to-day.
So to Westminster Hall, and there at Mrs. Michell’s shop sent for beer
and sugar and drink, and made great cheer with it among her and Mrs.
Howlett, her neighbour, and their daughters, especially Mrs. Howlett’s
daughter, Betty, which is a pretty girl, and one I have long called
wife, being, I formerly thought, like my own wife. After this good
neighbourhood, which I do to give them occasion of speaking well and
commending me in some company that now and then I know comes to their
shop, I went to the Six clerks’ office, and there had a writ for Tom
Trice, and paid 20s. for it to Wilkinson, and so up and down to many
places, among others to the viall maker’s, and there saw the head, which
now pleases me mightily, and so home, and being sent for presently to
Mr. Bland’s, where Mr. Povy and Gauden and I were invited to dinner,
which we had very finely and great plenty, but for drink, though many
and good, I drank nothing but small beer and water, which I drank so
much that I wish it may not do me hurt. They had a kinswoman, they call
daughter, in the house, a short, ugly, red-haired slut, that plays upon
the virginalls, and sings, but after such a country manner I was weary
of it, but yet could not but commend it. So by and by after dinner comes
Monsr. Gotier, who is beginning to teach her, but, Lord! what a droll
fellow it is to make her hold open her mouth, and telling this and that
so drolly would make a man burst, but himself I perceive sings very
well. Anon we sat dawn again to a collacon of cheesecakes, tarts,
custards, and such like, very handsome, and so up and away home, where
I at the office a while, till disturbed by, Mr. Hill, of Cambridge,
with whom I walked in the garden a while, and thence home and then in
my dining room walked, talking of several matters of state till 11 at
night, giving him a glass of wine. I was not unwilling to hear him talk,
though he is full of words, yet a man of large conversation, especially
among the Presbyters and Independents; he tells me that certainly, let
the Bishops alone, and they will ruin themselves, and he is confident
that the King’s declaration about two years since will be the foundation
of the settlement of the Church some time or other, for the King will
find it hard to banish all those that will appear Nonconformists upon
this Act that is coming out against them. He being gone, I to bed.