8th (Lord’s day). Up, and it being a very great frost, I walked to White
Hall, and to my Lord Sandwich’s by the fireside till chapel time, and so
to chappell, where there preached little Dr. Duport, of Cambridge,
upon Josiah’s words,--“But I and my house, we will serve the Lord.” But
though a great scholler, he made the most flat dead sermon, both for
matter and manner of delivery, that ever I heard, and very long beyond
his hour, which made it worse. Thence with Mr. Creed to the King’s Head
ordinary, where we dined well, and after dinner Sir Thomas Willis and
another stranger, and Creed and I, fell a-talking; they of the errours
and corruption of the Navy, and great expence thereof, not knowing who
I was, which at last I did undertake to confute, and disabuse them: and
they took it very well, and I hope it was to good purpose, they being
Parliament-men. By and by to my Lord’s, and with him a good while
talking upon his want of money, and ways of his borrowing some, &c.,
and then by other visitants, I withdrew and away, Creed and I and Captn.
Ferrers to the Park, and there walked finely, seeing people slide, we
talking all the while; and Captn. Ferrers telling me, among other Court
passages, how about a month ago, at a ball at Court, a child was dropped
by one of the ladies in dancing, but nobody knew who, it being taken
up by somebody in their handkercher. The next morning all the Ladies
of Honour appeared early at Court for their vindication, so that nobody
could tell whose this mischance should be. But it seems Mrs. Wells

     [Winifred Wells, maid of honour to the Queen, who figures in the
     “Grammont Memoirs.”  The king is supposed to have been father of the
     child.  A similar adventure is told of Mary Kirke (afterwards
     married to Sir Thomas Vernon), who figures in the “Grammont Memoirs”
      as Miss Warmestre.]

fell sick that afternoon, and hath disappeared ever since, so that it is
concluded that it was her. Another story was how my Lady Castlemaine, a
few days since, had Mrs. Stuart to an entertainment, and at night began
a frolique that they two must be married, and married they were, with
ring and all other ceremonies of church service, and ribbands and a sack
posset in bed, and flinging the stocking; but in the close, it is said
that my Lady Castlemaine, who was the bridegroom, rose, and the King
came and took her place with pretty Mrs. Stuart. This is said to be very
true. Another story was how Captain Ferrers and W. Howe both have often,
through my Lady Castlemaine’s window, seen her go to bed and Sir Charles
Barkeley in the chamber all the while with her. But the other day Captn.
Ferrers going to Sir Charles to excuse his not being so timely at his
arms the other day, Sir Charles swearing and cursing told him before
a great many other gentlemen that he would not suffer any man of the
King’s Guards to be absent from his lodging a night without leave. Not
but that, says he, once a week or so I know a gentleman must go..., and
I am not for denying it to any man, but however he shall be bound to
ask leave to lie abroad, and to give account of his absence, that we
may know what guard the King has to depend upon. The little Duke of
Monmouth, it seems, is ordered to take place of all Dukes, and so to
follow Prince Rupert now, before the Duke of Buckingham, or any else.
Whether the wind and the cold did cause it or no I know not, but having
been this day or two mightily troubled with an itching all over my
body’ which I took to be a louse or two that might bite me, I found this
afternoon that all my body is inflamed, and my face in a sad redness and
swelling and pimpled, so that I was before we had done walking not only
sick but ashamed of myself to see myself so changed in my countenance,
so that after we had thus talked we parted and I walked home with much
ado (Captn. Ferrers with me as far as Ludgate Hill towards Mr. Moore
at the Wardrobe), the ways being so full of ice and water by peoples’
trampling. At last got home and to bed presently, and had a very bad
night of it, in great pain in my stomach, and in great fever.