15th. Before I was up, my brother’s man came to tell me that my cozen,
Edward Pepys, was dead, died at Mrs. Turner’s, for which my wife and
I are very sorry, and the more for that his wife was the only handsome
woman of our name. So up and to the office, where the greatest business
was Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten against me for Sir W. Warren’s
contract for masts, to which I may go to my memorandum book to see what
past, but came off with conquest, and my Lord Barkely and Mr. Coventry
well convinced that we are well used. So home to dinner, and thither
came to me Mr. Mount and Mr. Luellin, I think almost foxed, and there
dined with me and very merry as I could be, my mind being troubled to
see things so ordered at the Board, though with no disparagement to me
at all. At dinner comes a messenger from the Counter with an execution
against me for the L30 10s., given the last verdict to Field. The man’s
name is Thomas, of the Poultry Counter. I sent Griffin with him to the
Dolphin, where Sir W. Batten was at dinner, and he being satisfied
that I should pay the money, I did cause the money to be paid him, and
Griffin to tell it out to him in the office. He offered to go along with
me to Sir R. Ford, but I thought it not necessary, but let him go with
it, he also telling me that there is never any receipt for it given,
but I have good witness of the payment of it. They being gone, Luellin
having again told me by myself that Deering is content to give me L50 if
I can sell his deals for him to the King, not that I did ever offer to
take it, or bid Luellin bargain for me with him, but did tacitly seem to
be willing to do him what service I could in it, and expect his
thanks, what he thought good. Thence to White Hall by coach, by the way
overtaking Mr. Moore, and took him into the coach to me, and there he
could tell me nothing of my Lord, how he stands as to his thoughts or
respect to me, but concludes that though at present he may be angry yet
he will come to be pleased again with me no doubt, and says that he do
mind his business well, and keeps at Court. So to White Hall, and there
by order found some of the Commissioners of Tangier met, and my Lord
Sandwich among the rest, to whom I bowed, but he shewed me very little
if any countenance at all, which troubles me mightily. Having soon done
there, I took up Mr. Moore again and set him down at Pauls, by the way
he proposed to me of a way of profit which perhaps may shortly be
made by money by fines upon houses at the Wardrobe, but how I did not
understand but left it to another discourse. So homeward, calling upon
Mr. Fen, by Sir G. Carteret’s desire, and did there shew him the bill of
Captain Taylor’s whereby I hope to get something justly. Home and to
my office, and there very late with Sir W. Warren upon very serious
discourse, telling him how matters passed to-day, and in the close he
and I did fall to talk very openly of the business of this office, and
(if I was not a little too open to tell him my interest, which is my
fault) he did give me most admirable advice, and such as do speak him a
most able and worthy man, and understanding seven times more than ever
I thought to be in him. He did particularly run over every one of the
officers and commanders, and shewed me how I had reason to mistrust
every one of them, either for their falsenesse or their over-great
power, being too high to fasten a real friendship in, and did give me
a common but a most excellent saying to observe in all my life. He did
give it in rhyme, but the sense was this, that a man should treat every
friend in his discourse and opening his mind to him as of one that may
hereafter be his foe. He did also advise me how I should take occasion
to make known to the world my case, and the pains that I take in my
business, and above all to be sure to get a thorough knowledge in my
employment, and to that add all the interest at Court that I can, which
I hope I shall do. He staid talking with me till almost 12 at night,
and so good night, being sorry to part with him, and more sorry that he
should have as far as Wapping to walk to-night. So I to my Journall and
so home, to supper and to bed.