23d. Up by times; and not daring to go by land, did (Griffin going along
with me for fear), slip to White Hall by water; where to Mr. Coventry,
and, as we used to do, to the Duke; the other of my fellows being come.
But we said nothing of our business, the Duke being sent for to the
King, that he could not stay to speak with us. This morning came my Lord
Windsor to kiss the Duke’s hand, being returned from Jamaica. He tells
the Duke, that from such a degree of latitude going thither he begun to
be sick, and was never well till his coming so far back again, and then
presently begun to be well. He told the Duke of their taking the fort of
St. Jago, upon Cuba, by his men; but, upon the whole, I believe that he
did matters like a young lord, and was weary of being upon service out
of his own country, where he might have pleasure. For methought it was a
shame to see him this very afternoon, being the first day of his coming
to town, to be at a playhouse. Thence to my Lord Sandwich, who though he
has been abroad again two or three days is falling ill again, and is let
blood this morning, though I hope it is only a great cold that he has
got. It was a great trouble to me (and I had great apprehensions of
it) that my Lord desired me to go to Westminster Hall, to the
Parliament-house door, about business; and to Sir Wm. Wheeler, which I
told him I would do, but durst not go for fear of being taken by these
rogues; but was forced to go to White Hall and take boat, and so land
below the Tower at the Iron-gate; and so the back way over Little Tower
Hill; and with my cloak over my face, took one of the watermen along
with me, and staid behind a wall in the New-buildings behind our garden,
while he went to see whether any body stood within the Merchants’ Gate,
under which we pass to go into our garden, and there standing but a
little dirty boy before the gate, did make me quake and sweat to think
he might be a Trepan. But there was nobody, and so I got safe into the
garden, and coming to open my office door, something behind it fell
in the opening, which made me start. So that God knows in what a sad
condition I should be in if I were truly in the condition that many a
poor man is for debt: and therefore ought to bless God that I have
no such reall reason, and to endeavour to keep myself, by my good
deportment and good husbandry, out of any such condition. At home I
found Mr. Creed with my wife, and so he dined with us, I finding by a
note that Mr. Clerke in my absence hath left here, that I am free; and
that he hath stopped all matters in Court; I was very glad of it, and
immediately had a light thought of taking pleasure to rejoice my heart,
and so resolved to take my wife to a play at Court to-night, and the
rather because it is my birthday, being this day thirty years old, for
which let me praise God. While my wife dressed herself, Creed and
I walked out to see what play was acted to-day, and we find it “The
Slighted Mayde.” But, Lord! to see that though I did know myself to be
out of danger, yet I durst not go through the street, but round by the
garden into Tower Street. By and by took coach, and to the Duke’s house,
where we saw it well acted, though the play hath little good in it,
being most pleased to see the little girl dance in boy’s apparel, she
having very fine legs, only bends in the hams, as I perceive all women
do. The play being done, we took coach and to Court, and there got good
places, and saw “The Wilde Gallant,” performed by the King’s house, but
it was ill acted, and the play so poor a thing as I never saw in my life
almost, and so little answering the name, that from beginning to end,
I could not, nor can at this time, tell certainly which was the Wild
Gallant. The King did not seem pleased at all, all the whole play, nor
any body else, though Mr. Clerke whom we met here did commend it to
us. My Lady Castlemaine was all worth seeing tonight, and little
Steward.--[Mrs. Stuart]--Mrs. Wells do appear at Court again, and looks
well; so that, it may be, the late report of laying the dropped child to
her was not true. It being done, we got a coach and got well home about