22nd. Up pretty betimes, and shall, I hope, come to myself and business
again, after a small playing the truant, for I find that my interest and
profit do grow daily, for which God be praised and keep me to my duty.
To my office, and anon one tells me that Rundall, the house-carpenter of
Deptford, hath sent me a fine blackbird, which I went to see. He tells
me he was offered 20s. for him as he came along, he do so whistle. So
to my office, and busy all the morning, among other things, learning to
understand the course of the tides, and I think I do now do it. At noon
Mr. Creed comes to me, and he and I to the Exchange, where I had much
discourse with several merchants, and so home with him to dinner, and
then by water to Greenwich, and calling at the little alehouse at the
end of the town to wrap a rag about my little left toe, being new sore
with walking, we walked pleasantly to Woolwich, in our way hearing the
nightingales sing. So to Woolwich yard, and after doing many things
there, among others preparing myself for a dispute against Sir W. Pen in
the business of Bowyer’s, wherein he is guilty of some corruption to the
King’s wrong, we walked back again without drinking, which I never do
because I would not make my coming troublesome to any, nor would become
obliged too much to any. In our going back we were overtook by Mr.
Steventon, a purser, and uncle to my clerk Will, who told me how he was
abused in the passing of his accounts by Sir J. Minnes to the degree
that I am ashamed to hear it, and resolve to retrieve the matter if I
can though the poor man has given it over. And however am pleased enough
to see that others do see his folly and dotage as well as myself, though
I believe in my mind the man in general means well.

Took boat at Greenwich and to Deptford, where I did the same thing, and
found Davis, the storekeeper, a knave, and shuffling in the business of
Bewpers, being of the party with Young and Whistler to abuse the King,
but I hope I shall be even with them. So walked to Redriffe, drinking
at the Half-way house, and so walked and by water to White Hall, all our
way by water coming and going reading a little book said to be writ by
a person of Quality concerning English gentry to be preferred before
titular honours, but the most silly nonsense, no sense nor grammar, yet
in as good words that ever I saw in all my life, but from beginning to
end you met not with one entire and regular sentence. At White Hall Sir
G. Carteret was out of the way, and so returned back presently, and home
by water and to bed.