29th. This day is kept strictly as a holy-day, being the King’s
Coronation. We lay long in bed, and it rained very hard, rain and hail,
almost all the morning. By and by Creed and I abroad, and called at
several churches; and it is a wonder to see, and by that to guess the
ill temper of the City at this time, either to religion in general, or
to the King, that in some churches there was hardly ten people in the
whole church, and those poor people. So to a coffee-house, and there in
discourse hear the King of France is likely to be well again. So home
to dinner, and out by water to the Royall Theatre, but they not acting
to-day, then to the Duke’s house, and there saw “The Slighted Mayde,”
 wherein Gosnell acted Pyramena, a great part, and did it very well, and
I believe will do it better and better, and prove a good actor. The play
is not very excellent, but is well acted, and in general the actors, in
all particulars, are better than at the other house. Thence to the Cocke
alehouse, and there having drunk, sent them with Creed to see the German
Princess,

     [Mary Moders, alias Stedman, a notorious impostor, who pretended to
     be a German princess.  Her arrival as the German princess “at the
     Exchange Tavern, right against the Stocks betwixt the Poultry and
     Cornhill, at 5 in the morning...., with her marriage to
     Carleton the taverner’s wife’s brother,” are incidents fully
     narrated in Francis Kirkman’s “Counterfeit Lady Unveiled,” 1673
     (“Boyne’s Tokens,” ed.  Williamson, vol. i., p. 703).  Her
     adventures formed the plot of a tragi-comedy by T. P., entitled “A
     Witty Combat, or the Female Victor,” 1663, which was acted with
     great applause by persons of quality in Whitsun week.  Mary Carleton
     was tried at the Old Bailey for bigamy and acquitted, after which
     she appeared on the stage in her own character as the heroine of a
     play entitled “The German Princess.”  Pepys went to the Duke’s House
     to see her on April 15th, 1664.  The rest of her life was one
     continued course of robbery and fraud, and in 1678 she was executed
     at Tyburn for stealing a piece of plate in Chancery Lane.]

at the Gatehouse, at Westminster, and I to my brother’s, and thence to
my uncle Fenner’s to have seen my aunt James (who has been long in town
and goes away to-morrow and I not seen her), but did find none of them
within, which I was glad of, and so back to my brother’s to speak
with him, and so home, and in my way did take two turns forwards and
backwards through the Fleete Ally to see a couple of pretty [strumpets]
that stood off the doors there, and God forgive me I could scarce stay
myself from going into their houses with them, so apt is my nature to
evil after once, as I have these two days, set upon pleasure again. So
home and to my office to put down these two days’ journalls, then home
again and to supper, and then Creed and I to bed with good discourse,
only my mind troubled about my spending my time so badly for these seven
or eight days; but I must impute it to the disquiet that my mind has
been in of late about my wife, and for my going these two days to plays,
for which I have paid the due forfeit by money and abating the times of
going to plays at Court, which I am now to remember that I have cleared
all my times that I am to go to Court plays to the end of this month,
and so June is the first time that I am to begin to reckon.