23rd. Up, and this morning comes Mr. Clerke, and tells me that the
Injunction against Trice is dismissed again, which troubles me much. So
I am to look after it in the afternoon. There comes also by appointment
my uncle Thomas, to receive the first payment of his daughter’s money.
But showing of me the original of the deed by which his daughter gives
her right to her legacy to him, and the copy of it attested by the
Scrivener, for me to keep by me, I did find some difference, and
thereupon did look more into it, and at last did find the whole thing
a forgery; yet he maintained it again and again, upon oath, that it had
been signed and sealed by my cozen Mary ever since before her marriage.
So I told him to his teeth he did like a knave, and so he did, and went
with him to the Scrivener at Bedlam, and there found how it came
to pass, viz., that he had lost, or pretends to have lost, the true
original, and that so he was forced to take this course; but a knave,
at least a man that values not what he swears to, I perceive he is. But
however I am now better able to see myself fully secured before I part
with the money, for I find that his son Charles has right to this legacy
till the first L100 of his daughter’s portion be paid, he being bond for
it. So I put him upon getting both his sons to be bound for my security,
and so left him and so home, and then abroad to my brother’s, but found
him abroad at the young couple that was married yesterday, and he one of
the Br[ide’s] men, a kinswoman (Brumfield) of the Joyces married to an
upholster. Thence walked to the King’s Head at Charing Cross and there
dined, and hear that the Queen slept pretty well last night, but her
fever continues upon her still. It seems she hath never a Portuguese
doctor here. Thence by appointment to the Six Clerks’ office to meet Mr.
Clerke, which I did and there waited all the afternoon for Wilkinson
my attorney, but he came not, and so vexed and weary we parted, and I
endeavoured but in vain to have found Dr. Williams, of whom I shall have
use in Trice’s business, but I could not find him. So weary walked home;
in my way bought a large kitchen knife and half dozen oyster knives.
Thence to Mr. Holliard, who tells me that Mullins is dead of his leg cut
off the other day, but most basely done. He tells me that there is no
doubt but that all my slyme do come away in my water, and therefore no
fear of the stone; but that my water being so slymy is a good sign. He
would have me now and then to take a clyster, the same I did the other
day, though I feel no pain, only to keep me loose, and instead of
butter, which he would have to be salt butter, he would have me
sometimes use two or three ounces of honey, at other times two or three
ounces of Linseed oil. Thence to Mr. Rawlinson’s and saw some of my new
bottles made, with my crest upon them, filled with wine, about five or
six dozen. So home and to my office a little, and thence home to prepare
myself against T. Trice, and also to draw a bond fit for my uncle and
his sons to enter into before I pay them the money. That done to bed.