12th (Lord’s day). Up, and meeting Tom Willson he asked my pardon again,
which I easily did give him, telling him only that it was well I was
not a woman with child, for it might have made me miscarry. With Sir
J. Minnes to church, where an indifferent good sermon. Here I saw Mrs.
Becky Allen, who hath been married, and is this day churched, after her
bearing a child. She is grown tall, but looks very white and thin, and I
can find no occasion while I am here to come to have her company, which
I desire and expected in my coming, but only coming out of the church
I kissed her and her sister and mother-in-law. So to dinner, Sir J.
Minnes, Commissioner Pett, and I, &c., and after dinner walked in the
garden, it being a very fine day, the best we have had this great while,
if not this whole summer. To church again, and after that walked through
the Rope-ground to the Dock, and there over and over the Dock and
grounds about it, and storehouses, &c., with the officers of the Yard,
and then to Commissioner Pett’s and had a good sullybub and other good
things, and merry. Commissioner Pett showed me alone his bodys as a
secrett, which I found afterwards by discourse with Sir J. Minnes that
he had shown them him, wherein he seems to suppose great mystery in the
nature of Lynes to be hid, but I do not understand it at all. Thence
walked to the Hill-house, being myself much dissatisfied, and more than
I thought I should have been with Commissioner Pett, being, by what I
saw since I came hither, convinced that he is not able to exercise the
command in the Yard over the officers that he ought to do, or somebody
else, if ever the service be well looked after there. Sat up and with
Sir J. Minnes talking, and he speaking his mind in slighting of the
Commissioner, for which I wish there was not so much reason. For I do
see he is but a man of words, though indeed he is the ablest man that
we have to do service if he would or durst. Sir J. Minnes being gone
to bed, I took Mr. Whitfield, one of the clerks, and walked to the Dock
about eleven at night, and there got a boat and a crew, and rowed down
to the guard-ships, it being a most pleasant moonshine evening that ever
I saw almost. The guard-ships were very ready to hail us, being no doubt
commanded thereto by their Captain, who remembers how I surprised them
the last time I was here. However, I found him ashore, but the ship in
pretty good order, and the arms well fixed, charged, and primed. Thence
to the Soveraign, where I found no officers aboard, no arms fixed, nor
any powder to prime their few guns, which were charged, without bullet
though. So to the London, where neither officers nor any body awake; I
boarded her, and might have done what I would, and at last could find
but three little boys; and so spent the whole night in visiting all the
ships, in which I found, for the most part, neither an officer aboard,
nor any men so much as awake, which I was grieved to find, specially so
soon after a great Larum, as Commissioner Pett brought us word that he
[had] provided against, and put all in a posture of defence but a week
ago, all which I am resolved to represent to the Duke.