30th. Up and to the office to get business ready for our sitting, this
being the first day of altering it from afternoon during the Parliament
sitting to the fore-noon again. By and by Mr. Coventry only came (Sir
John Minnes and Sir William Batten being gone this morning to Portsmouth
to pay some ships and the yard there), and after doing a little business
he and I down to Woolwich, and there up and down the yard, and by and by
came Sir G. Carteret and we all looked into matters, and then by water
back to Deptford, where we dined with him at his house, a very good
dinner and mightily tempted with wines of all sorts and brave French
Syder, but I drunk none. But that which is a great wonder I find his
little daughter Betty, that was in hanging sleeves but a month or two
ago, and is a very little young child; married, and to whom, but to
young Scott, son to Madam Catharine Scott, that was so long in law,
and at whose triall I was with her husband; he pleading that it was
unlawfully got and would not own it, she, it seems, being brought to
bed of it, if not got by somebody else at Oxford, but it seems a little
before his death he did own the child, and hath left him his estate, not
long since. So Sir G. Carteret hath struck up of a sudden a match with
him for his little daughter. He hath about L2000 per annum; and it seems
Sir G. Carteret hath by this means over-reached Sir H. Bennet, who did
endeavour to get this gentleman for a sister of his, but Sir G. Carteret
I say has over-reached him. By this means Sir G. Carteret hath married
two daughters this year both very well. After dinner into Deptford yard,
but our bellies being full we could do no great business, and so parted,
and Mr. Coventry and I to White Hall by water, where we also parted, and
I to several places about business, and so calling for my five books of
the Variorum print bound according to my common binding instead of the
other which is more gaudy I went home. The town talk this day is of
nothing but the great foot-race run this day on Banstead Downes, between
Lee, the Duke of Richmond’s footman, and a tyler, a famous runner. And
Lee hath beat him; though the King and Duke of York and all men almost
did bet three or four to one upon the tyler’s head.