April 1st. Up betimes and abroad to my brother’s, but he being gone out
I went to the Temple to my Cozen Roger Pepys, to see and talk with him
a little; who tells me that, with much ado, the Parliament do agree to
throw down Popery; but he says it is with so much spite and passion, and
an endeavour of bringing all Non-conformists into the same condition,
that he is afeard matters will not yet go so well as he could wish.
Thence back to my brother’s, in my way meeting Mr. Moore and talking
with him about getting me some money, and calling at my brother’s they
tell me that my brother is still abroad, and that my father is not
yet up. At which I wondered, not thinking that he was come, though
I expected him, because I looked for him at my house. So I up to his
bedside and staid an hour or two talking with him. Among other things
he tells me how unquiett my mother is grown, that he is not able to live
almost with her, if it were not for Pall. All other matters are as well
as upon so hard conditions with my uncle Thomas we can expect them.
I left him in bed, being very weary, to come to my house to-night or
tomorrow, when he pleases, and so I home, calling on the virginall
maker, buying a rest for myself to tune my tryangle, and taking one of
his people along with me to put it in tune once more, by which I learned
how to go about it myself for the time to come. So to dinner, my
wife being lazily in bed all this morning. Ashwell and I dined below
together, and a pretty girl she is, and I hope will give my wife and
myself good content, being very humble and active, my cook maid do also
dress my meat very well and neatly. So to my office all the afternoon
till night, and then home, calling at Sir W. Batten’s, where was Sir
J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen, I telling them how by my letter this day from
Commissioner Pett I hear that his Stempeese

     [Stemples, cross pieces which are put into a frame of woodwork to
     cure and strengthen a shaft.]

he undertook for the new ship at Woolwich, which we have been so long,
to our shame, in looking for, do prove knotty and not fit for service.
Lord! how Sir J. Minnes, like a mad coxcomb, did swear and stamp,
swearing that Commissioner Pett hath still the old heart against the
King that ever he had, and that this was his envy against his brother
that was to build the ship, and all the damnable reproaches in the
world, at which I was ashamed, but said little; but, upon the whole,
I find him still a fool, led by the nose with stories told by Sir W.
Batten, whether with or without reason. So, vexed in my mind to see
things ordered so unlike gentlemen, or men of reason, I went home and to
bed.