26th. Up, and after doing something in order to the putting of my house
in order now the joynery is done, I went by water to White Hall, where
the Court full of waggons and horses, the King and Court going this day
out towards the Bath, and I to St. James’s, where I spent an hour or
more talking of many things to my great content with Mr. Coventry in his
chamber, he being ready to set forth too with the Duke to-day, and so
left him, and I meeting Mr. Gauden, with him to our offices and in Sir
W. Pen’s chamber did discourse by a meeting on purpose with Mr. Waith
about the victualling business and came to some issue in it. So home to
dinner, and Mr. Moore came and dined with me, and after dinner I paid
him some money which evened all reckonings between him and me to this
day, and for my Lord also I paid him some money, so that now my Lord
owes me, for which I have his bond, just L700. After long discourse with
him of the fitness of his giving me a receipt for this money, which I
for my security think necessary and he otherwise do not think so, at
last, after being a little angry, and I resolving not to let go my money
without it, he did give me one. Thence I took him, and he and I took a
pleasant walk to Deptford and back again, I doing much business there.
He went home and I home also, indoors to supper, being very glad to see
my house begin to look like itself again, hoping after this is over not
to be in any dirt a great while again, but it is very handsome, and
will be more when the floors come to be of one colour. So weary to bed.
Pleased this day to see Captain Hickes come to me with a list of all
the officers of Deptford Yard, wherein he, being a high old Cavalier,
do give me an account of every one of them to their reproach in all
respects, and discovers many of their knaverys; and tells me, and so I
thank God I hear every where, that my name is up for a good husband for
the King, and a good man, for which I bless God; and that he did this by
particular direction of Mr. Coventry.