3rd. Up both of us very betimes and to the Yard, and see the men called
over and choose some to be discharged. Then to the Ropehouses and viewed
them all and made an experiment which was the stronger, English or Riga
hemp, the latter proved the stronger, but the other is very good, and
much better we believe than any but Riga. We did many other things this
morning, and I caused the Timber measurer to measure some timber, where
I found much fault and with reason, which we took public notice of, and
did give them admonition for the time to come. At noon Mr. Pett did give
us a very great dinner, too big in all conscience, so that most of
it was left untouched. Here was Collonell Newman and several other
gentlemen of the country and officers of the yard. After dinner they
withdrew and Commissioner Pett, Mr. Coventry and I sat close to our
business all the noon in his parler, and there run through much business
and answered several people. And then in the evening walked in the
garden, where we conjured him to look after the yard, and for the time
to come that he would take the whole faults and ill management of the
yard upon himself, he having full power and our concurrence to suspend
or do anything else that he thinks fit to keep people and officers to
their duty. He having made good promises, though I fear his performance,
we parted (though I spoke so freely that he could have been angry) good
friends, and in some hopes that matters will be better for the time to
come. So walked to the Hillhouse (which we did view and the yard about
it, and do think to put it off as soon as we can conveniently) and there
made ourselves ready and mounted and rode to Gravesend (my riding Coate
not being to be found I fear it is stole) on our way being overtaken by
Captain Browne that serves the office of the Ordnance at Chatham. All
the way, though he was a rogue and served the late times all along, yet
he kept us in discourse of the many services that he did for many of the
King’s party, lords and Dukes, and among others he recovered a dog that
was stolne from Mr. Cary (head-keeper of the buck-hounds to the King)
and preserved several horses of the Duke of Richmond’s, and his best
horse he was forst to put out his eyes and keep him for a stallion
to preserve him from being carried away. But he gone at last upon
my enquiry to tell us how (he having been here too for survey of the
Ropeyard) the day’s work of the Rope-makers become settled, which
pleased me very well. Being come to our Inn Mr. Coventry and I sat, and
talked till 9 or 10 a-clock and then to bed.