22nd. I up, well refreshed after my journey, and to my office and there
set some things in order, and then Sir W. Pen and I met and held
an office, and at noon to dinner, and so by water with my wife to
Westminster, she to see her father and mother, and we met again at my
Lord’s lodgings, and thence by water home again, where at the door we
met Sir W. Pen and his daughter coming to visit us, and after their
visit I to my office, and after some discourse to my great satisfaction
with Sir W. Warren about our bargain of masts, I wrote my letters by the
post, and so home to supper and to bed. This day my wife showed me bills
printed, wherein her father, with Sir John Collidon and Sir Edward Ford,
have got a patent for curing of smoky chimneys.

     [The Patent numbered 138 is printed in the appendix to Wheatley’s
     “Samuel Pepys and the World he lived in” (p. 241).  It is drawn in
     favour of John Colladon, Doctor in Physicke, and of Alexander
     Marchant, of St. Michall, and describes “a way to prevent and cure
     the smoakeing of Chimneys, either by stopping the tunnell towards
     the top, and altering the former course of the smoake, or by setting
     tunnells with checke within the chimneyes.”  Sir Edward Ford’s name
     does not appear in the patent.]

I wish they may do good thereof, but fear it will prove but a poor
project. This day the King and Queen are to come to Oxford. I hear my
Lady Castlemaine is for certain gone to Oxford to meet him, having lain
within here at home this week or two, supposed to have miscarried; but
for certain is as great in favour as heretofore;

     [According to Collins, Henry Fitzroy, Lady Castlemaine’s second son
     by Charles II., was born on September 20th, 1663.  He was the first
     Duke of Grafton.--B.]

at least Mrs. Sarah at my Lord’s, who hears all from their own family,
do say so. Every day brings newes of the Turke’s advance into Germany,
to the awakeing of all the Christian Princes thereabouts, and possessing
himself of Hungary. My present care is fitting my wife’s closett and my
house, and making her a velvet coate, and me a new black cloth suit,
and coate and cloake, and evening my reckoning as well as I can against
Michaelmas Day, hoping for all that to have my balance as great or
greater than ever I had yet.