8th. Up betimes and to my office, and by and by, about 8 o’clock, to the
Temple to Commissioner Pett lately come to town and discoursed about the
affairs of our office, how ill they go through the corruption and folly
of Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes. Thence by water to White Hall, to
chappell; where preached Dr. Pierce, the famous man that preached the
sermon so much cried up, before the King against the Papists. His matter
was the Devil tempting our Saviour, being carried into the Wilderness
by the spirit. And he hath as much of natural eloquence as most men that
ever I heard in my life, mixed with so much learning. After sermon I
went up and saw the ceremony of the Bishop of Peterborough’s paying
homage upon the knee to the King, while Sir H. Bennet, Secretary, read
the King’s grant of the Bishopric of Lincoln, to which he is translated.
His name is Dr. Lany. Here I also saw the Duke of Monmouth, with his
Order of the Garter, the first time I ever saw it. I am told that the
University of Cambridge did treat him a little while since with all the
honour possible, with a comedy at Trinity College, and banquet; and made
him Master of Arts there. All which, they say, the King took very well.
Dr. Raynbow, Master of Magdalen, being now Vice-Chancellor. Home by
water to dinner, and with my father, wife, and Ashwell, after dinner,
by water towards Woolwich, and in our way I bethought myself that we had
left our poor little dog that followed us out of doors at the waterside,
and God knows whether he be not lost, which did not only strike my
wife into a great passion but I must confess myself also; more than was
becoming me. We immediately returned, I taking another boat and with my
father went to Woolwich, while they went back to find the dog. I took
my father on board the King’s pleasure boat and down to Woolwich, and
walked to Greenwich thence and turning into the park to show my father
the steps up the hill, we found my wife, her woman, and dog attending
us, which made us all merry again, and so took boats, they to Deptford
and so by land to Half-way house, I into the King’s yard and overlook
them there, and eat and drank with them, and saw a company of seamen
play drolly at our pence, and so home by water. I a little at the
office, and so home to supper and to bed, after having Ashwell play my
father and me a lesson upon her Tryangle.