12th. Up and to the office where all the morning, and among other things
got Sir G. Carteret to put his letters to Captain Taylor’s bill by which
I am in hopes to get L5, which joys my heart. We had this morning a
great dispute between Mr. Gauden, Victualler of the Navy, and Sir J.
Lawson, and the rest of the Commanders going against Argier, about their
fish and keeping of Lent; which Mr. Gauden so much insists upon to have
it observed, as being the only thing that makes up the loss of his dear
bargain all the rest of the year. At noon went home and there I found
that one Abrahall, who strikes in for the serving of the King with Ship
chandlery ware, has sent my wife a Japan gowne, which pleases her very
well and me also, it coming very opportune, but I know not how to carry
myself to him, I being already obliged so far to Mrs. Russell, so that I
am in both their pays. To the Exchange, where I had sent Luellin word
I would come to him, and thence brought him home to dinner with me. He
tells me that W. Symon’s wife is dead, for which I am sorry, she being
a good woman, and tells me an odde story of her saying before her death,
being in good sense, that there stood her uncle Scobell. Then he began
to tell me that Mr. Deering had been with him to desire him to speak to
me that if I would get him off with these goods upon his hands, he would
give me 50 pieces, and further that if I would stand his friend to helpe
him to the benefit of his patent as the King’s merchant, he could spare
me L200 per annum out of his profits. I was glad to hear both of these,
but answered him no further than that as I would not by any thing be
bribed to be unjust in my dealings,

     [Edward Dering was granted, August, 1660, “the office of King’s
     merchant in the East, for buying and providing necessaries for
     apparelling the Navy” (“Calendar,” Domestic, 1660-61, p.  212).
     There is evidence among the State Papers of some dissatisfaction
     with the timber, &c., which he supplied to the Navy, and at this
     time he appears to have had some stores left on his hands.]

so I was not so squeamish as not to take people’s acknowledgment where
I had the good fortune by my pains to do them good and just offices, and
so I would not come to be at any agreement with him, but I would
labour to do him this service and to expect his consideration thereof
afterwards as he thought fit. So I expect to hear more of it. I did make
very much of Luellin in hopes to have some good by this business, and in
the evening received some money from Mr. Moore, and so went and settled
accounts in my books between him and me, and I do hope at Christmas not
only to find myself as rich or more than ever I was yet, but also my
accounts in less compass, fewer reckonings either of debts or moneys
due to me, than ever I have been for some years, and indeed do so, the
goodness of God bringing me from better to a better expectation and
hopes of doing well. This day I heard my Lord Barkeley tell Sir G.
Carteret that he hath letters from France that the King hath unduked
twelve Dukes, only to show his power and to crush his nobility, who he
said he did see had heretofore laboured to cross him. And this my Lord
Barkeley did mightily magnify, as a sign of a brave and vigorous mind,
that what he saw fit to be done he dares do. At night, after business
done at my office, home to supper and to bed. I have forgot to set down
a very remarkable passage that, Lewellen being gone, and I going into
the office, and it begun to be dark, I found nobody there, my clerks
being at the burial of a child of W. Griffin’s, and so I spent a little
time till they came, walking in the garden, and in the mean time, while
I was walking Mrs. Pen’s pretty maid came by my side, and went into the
office, but finding nobody there I went in to her, being glad of the
occasion. She told me as she was going out again that there was nobody
there, and that she came for a sheet of paper. So I told her I would
supply her, and left her in the office and went into my office and
opened my garden door, thinking to have got her in, and there to have
caressed her, and seeming looking for paper, I told her this way was as
near a way for her, but she told me she had left the door open and so
did not come to me. So I carried her some paper and kissed her, leading
her by the hand to the garden door and there let her go. But, Lord! to
see how much I was put out of order by this surprisal, and how much I
could have subjected my mind to have treated and been found with this
wench, and how afterwards I was troubled to think what if she should
tell this and whether I had spoke or done any thing that might be unfit
for her to tell. But I think there was nothing more passed than just
what I here write.