4th. Up betimes, and my wife and Ashwell and I whiled away the morning
up and down while they got themselves ready, and I did so watch to see
my wife put on drawers, which poor soul she did, and yet I could not get
off my suspicions, she having a mind to go into Fenchurch Street before
she went out for good and all with me, which I must needs construe to be
to meet Pembleton, when she afterwards told me it was to buy a fan
that she had not a mind that I should know of, and I believe it is so.
Specially I did by a wile get out of my boy that he did not yesterday go
to Pembleton’s or thereabouts, but only was sent all that time for some
starch, and I did see him bringing home some, and yet all this cannot
make my mind quiet. At last by coach I carried her to Westminster Hall,
and they two to Mrs. Bowyer to go from thence to my wife’s father’s and
Ashwell to hers, and by and by seeing my wife’s father in the Hall, and
being loth that my wife should put me to another trouble and charge by
missing him to-day, I did employ a porter to go from a person unknown to
tell him his daughter was come to his lodgings, and I at a distance did
observe him, but, Lord! what a company of questions he did ask him, what
kind of man I was, and God knows what. So he went home, and after I
had staid in the Hall a good while, where I heard that this day the
Archbishop of Canterbury, Juxon, a man well spoken of by all for a good
man, is dead; and the Bishop of London is to have his seat. Home by
water, where by and by comes Dean Honiwood, and I showed him my double
horizontal diall, and promise to give him one, and that shall be it. So,
without eating or drinking, he went away to Mr. Turner’s, where Sir J.
Minnes do treat my Lord Chancellor and a great deal of guests to-day
with a great dinner, which I thank God I do not pay for; and besides,
I doubt it is too late for any man to expect any great service from my
Lord Chancellor, for which I am sorry, and pray God a worse do not come
in his room. So I to dinner alone, and so to my chamber, and then to the
office alone, my head aching and my mind in trouble for my wife, being
jealous of her spending the day, though God knows I have no great
reason. Yet my mind is troubled. By and by comes Will Howe to see us,
and walked with me an hour in the garden, talking of my Lord’s falling
to business again, which I am glad of, and his coming to lie at his
lodgings at White Hall again. The match between Sir J. Cutts and my Lady
Jemimah, he says, is likely to go on; for which I am glad. In the Hall
to-day Dr. Pierce tells me that the Queen begins to be brisk, and play
like other ladies, and is quite another woman from what she was, of
which I am glad. It may be, it may make the King like her the better,
and forsake his two mistresses, my Lady Castlemaine and Stewart. He gone
we sat at the office till night, and then home, where my wife is come,
and has been with her father all the afternoon, and so home, and she
and I to walk in the garden, giving ear to her discourse of her father’s
affairs, and I found all well, so after putting things in order at my
office, home to supper and to bed.