14th. Up and to the office, where we sat, and after we had almost
done, Sir W. Batten desired to have the room cleared, and there he did
acquaint the board how he was obliged to answer to something lately said
which did reflect upon the Comptroller and him, and to that purpose
told how the bargain for Winter’s timber did not prove so bad as I had
reported to the board it would. After he had done I cleared the matter
that I did not mention the business as a thing designed by me against
them, but was led to it by Sir J. Minnes, and that I said nothing but
what I was told by Mayers the surveyor as much as by Deane upon whom
they laid all the fault, which I must confess did and do still trouble
me, for they report him to be a fellow not fit to be employed, when in
my conscience he deserves better than any officer in the yard. I thought
it not convenient to vindicate him much now, but time will serve when I
will do it, and I am bound to do it. I offered to proceed to examine
and prove what I said if they please, but Mr. Coventry most discreetly
advised not, it being to no purpose, and that he did believe that what
I said did not by my manner of speaking it proceed from any design of
reproaching them, and so it ended. But my great trouble is for poor
Deane. At noon home and dined with my wife, and after dinner Will told
me if I pleased he was ready to remove his things, and so before my
wife I did give him good counsel, and that his going should not abate
my kindnesse for him, if he carried himself well, and so bid “God bless
him,” and left him to remove his things, the poor lad weeping, but I am
apt to think matters will be the better both for him and us. So to the
office and there late busy. In the evening Mr. Moore came to tell me
that he had no opportunity of speaking his mind to my Lord yesterday,
and so I am resolved to write to him very suddenly. So after my business
done I home, I having staid till 12 o’clock at night almost, making an
end of a letter to Sir G. Carteret about the late contract for masts,
wherein I have done myself right, and no wrong to Sir W. Batten. This
night I think is the first that I have lain without ever a man in my
house besides myself, since I came to keep any. Will being this night
gone to his lodging, and by the way I hear to-day that my boy Waynman
has behaved himself so with Mr. Davis that they have got him put into
a Barbadoes ship to be sent away, and though he sends to me to get a
release for him I will not out of love to the boy, for I doubt to keep
him here were to bring him to the gallows.