5th. Rose this morning early, only to try with intention to begin my
last summer’s course in rising betimes. So to my office a little, and
then to Westminster by coach with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, in
our way talking of Sir W. Pen’s business of his patent, which I think
I have put a stop to wholly, for Sir J. Minnes swears he will never
consent to it. Here to the Lobby, and spoke with my cozen Roger, who is
going to Cambridge to-morrow. In the Hall I do hear that the Catholiques
are in great hopes for all this, and do set hard upon the King to get
Indulgence. Matters, I hear, are all naught in Ireland, and that the
Parliament has voted, and the people, that is, the Papists, do cry out
against the Commissioners sent by the King; so that they say the English
interest will be lost there. Thence I went to see my Lord Sandwich, who
I found very ill, and by his cold being several nights hindered from
sleep, he is hardly able to open his eyes, and is very weak and sad
upon it, which troubled me much. So after talking with Mr. Cooke, whom
I found there, about his folly for looking and troubling me and other
friends in getting him a place (that is, storekeeper of the Navy at
Tangier) before there is any such thing, I returned to the Hall, and
thence back with the two knights home again by coach, where I found Mr.
Moore got abroad, and dined with me, which I was glad to see, he having
not been able to go abroad a great while. Then came in Mr. Hawley and
dined with us, and after dinner I left them, and to the office, where
we sat late, and I do find that I shall meet with nothing to oppose my
growing great in the office but Sir W. Pen, who is now well again, and
comes into the office very brisk, and, I think, to get up his time
that he has been out of the way by being mighty diligent at the office,
which, I pray God, he may be, but I hope by mine to weary him out, for
I am resolved to fall to business as hard as I can drive, God giving me
health. At my office late, and so home to supper and to bed.