14th. Up and to my office, where all the morning, and part of it Sir
J. Minnes spent, as he do every thing else, like a fool, reading
the Anatomy of the body to me, but so sillily as to the making of
me understand any thing that I was weary of him, and so I toward the
‘Change and met with Mr. Grant, and he and I to the Coffee-house, where
I understand by him that Sir W. Petty and his vessel are coming, and
the King intends to go to Portsmouth to meet it. Thence home and
after dinner my wife and I, by Mr. Rawlinson’s conduct, to the Jewish
Synagogue: where the men and boys in their vayles, and the women behind
a lattice out of sight; and some things stand up, which I believe is
their Law, in a press to which all coming in do bow; and at the putting
on their vayles do say something, to which others that hear him do cry
Amen, and the party do kiss his vayle. Their service all in a singing
way, and in Hebrew. And anon their Laws that they take out of the press
are carried by several men, four or five several burthens in all, and
they do relieve one another; and whether it is that every one desires to
have the carrying of it, I cannot tell, thus they carried it round about
the room while such a service is singing. And in the end they had a
prayer for the King, which they pronounced his name in Portugall; but
the prayer, like the rest, in Hebrew. But, Lord! to see the disorder,
laughing, sporting, and no attention, but confusion in all their
service, more like brutes than people knowing the true God, would make
a man forswear ever seeing them more and indeed I never did see so much,
or could have imagined there had been any religion in the whole world so
absurdly performed as this. Away thence with my mind strongly disturbed
with them, by coach and set down my wife in Westminster Hall, and I to
White Hall, and there the Tangier Committee met, but the Duke and the
Africa Committee meeting in our room, Sir G. Carteret; Sir W. Compton,
Mr. Coventry, Sir W. Rider, Cuttance and myself met in another room,
with chairs set in form but no table, and there we had very fine
discourses of the business of the fitness to keep Sally, and also of the
terms of our King’s paying the Portugees that deserted their house at
Tangier, which did much please me, and so to fetch my wife, and so
to the New Exchange about her things, and called at Thomas Pepys the
turner’s and bought something there, an so home to supper and to bed,
after I had been a good while with Sir W. Pen, railing and speaking
freely our minds against Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, but no more
than the folly of one and the knavery of the other do deserve.