2nd. Up by very betimes and to my office, where all the morning till
towards noon, and then by coach to Westminster Hall with Sir W. Pen, and
while he went up to the House I walked in the Hall with Mr. Pierce, the
surgeon, that I met there, talking about my business the other day with
Holmes, whom I told my mind, and did freely tell how I do depend upon my
care and diligence in my employment to bear me out against the pride
of Holmes or any man else in things that are honest, and much to that
purpose which I know he will make good use of. But he did advise me to
take as few occasions as I can of disobliging Commanders, though this is
one that every body is glad to hear that he do receive a check. By and
by the House rises and I home again with Sir W. Pen, and all the way
talking of the same business, to whom I did on purpose tell him my mind
freely, and let him see that it must be a wiser man than Holmes (in
these very words) that shall do me any hurt while I do my duty. I to
remember him of Holmes’s words against Sir J. Minnes, that he was a
knave, rogue, coward, and that he will kick him and pull him by the
ears, which he remembered all of them and may have occasion to do it
hereafter to his owne shame to suffer them to be spoke in his presence
without any reply but what I did give him, which, has caused all this
feud. But I am glad of it, for I would now and then take occasion to
let the world know that I will not be made a novice. Sir W. Pen took
occasion to speak about my wife’s strangeness to him and his daughter,
and that believing at last that it was from his taking of Sarah to be
his maid, he hath now put her away, at which I am glad. He told me, that
this day the King hath sent to the House his concurrence wholly with
them against the Popish priests, Jesuits, &c., which gives great
content, and I am glad of it. So home, whither my father comes and dines
with us, and being willing to be merry with him I made myself so as much
as I could, and so to the office, where we sat all the afternoon, and at
night having done all my business I went home to my wife and father, and
supped, and so to bed, my father lying with me in Ashwell’s bed in the
red chamber.