27th. Up in the morning about 7 o’clock, and after a little study,
resolved of riding to the Wells to look for our dogg, which we did, but
could hear nothing; but it being much a warmer day than yesterday
there was great store of gallant company, more than then, to my greater
pleasure. There was at a distance, under one of the trees on the common,
a company got together that sung. I, at the distance, and so all the
rest being a quarter of a mile off, took them for the Waytes, so I rode
up to them, and found them only voices, some citizens met by chance,
that sung four or five parts excellently. I have not been more pleased
with a snapp of musique, considering the circumstances of the time and
place, in all my life anything so pleasant. We drank each of us, three
cupps, and so, after riding up to the horsemen upon the hill, where
they were making of matches to run, we went away and to Yowell, where we
found our breakfast, the remains of our supper last night hashed, and
by and by, after the smith had set on two new shoes to Creed’s horse, we
mounted, and with little discourse, I being intent upon getting home in
time, we rode hard home, observing Mr. Gauden’s house, but not calling
there (it being too late for me to stay, and wanting their dog too). The
house stands very finely, and has a graceful view to the highway. Set
up our horses at Fox Hall, and I by water (observing the King’s barge
attending his going to the House this day) home, it being about one
o’clock. So got myself ready and shifting myself, and so by water to
Westminster, and there came most luckily to the Lords’ House as the
House of Commons were going into the Lord’s House, and there I crowded
in along with the Speaker, and got to stand close behind him, where he
made his speech to the King (who sat with his crown on and robes, and so
all the Lords in their robes, a fine sight); wherein he told his Majesty
what they have done this Parliament, and now offered for his royall
consent. The greatest matters were a bill for the Lord’s day (which it
seems the Lords have lost, and so cannot be passed, at which the Commons
are displeased); the bills against Conventicles and Papists (but it
seems the Lords have not passed them), and giving his Majesty four
entire subsidys; which last, with about twenty smaller Acts, were passed
with this form: The Clerk of the House reads the title of the bill, and
then looks at the end and there finds (writ by the King I suppose) “Le
Roy le veult,” and that he reads. And to others he reads, “Soit fait
comme vous desirez.” And to the Subsidys, as well that for the
Commons, I mean the layety, as for the Clergy, the King writes, “Le Roy
remerciant les Seigneurs, &c., Prelats, &c., accepte leur benevolences.”
 The Speaker’s speech was far from any oratory, but was as plain (though
good matter) as any thing could be, and void of elocution. After the
bills passed, the King, sitting on his throne, with his speech writ in a
paper which he held in his lap, and scarce looked off of it, I thought,
all the time he made his speech to them, giving them thanks for their
subsidys, of which, had he not need, he would not have asked or received
them; and that need, not from any extravagancys of his, he was sure,
in any thing, but the disorders of the times compelling him to be at
greater charge than he hoped for the future, by their care in their
country, he should be: and that for his family expenses and others, he
would labour however to retrench in many things convenient, and would
have all others to do so too. He desired that nothing of old faults
should be remembered, or severity for the same used to any in the
country, it being his desire to have all forgot as well as forgiven.
But, however, to use all care in suppressing any tumults, &c.; assuring
them that the restless spirits of his and their adversaries have great
expectations of something to be done this summer. And promised that
though the Acts about Conventicles and Papists were not ripe for passing
this Session, yet he would take care himself that neither of them should
in this intervall be encouraged to the endangering of the peace; and
that at their next meeting he would himself prepare two bills for them
concerning them. So he concluded, that for the better proceeding of
justice he did think fit to make this a Session, and to prorogue them
to the 16th of March next. His speech was very plain, nothing at all
of spirit in it, nor spoke with any; but rather on the contrary
imperfectly, repeating many times his words though he read all which I
was sorry to see, it having not been hard for him to have got all the
speech without book. So they all went away, the King out of the House at
the upper end, he being by and by to go to Tunbridge to the Queen; and I
in the Painted Chamber spoke with my Lord Sandwich while he was putting
off his robes, who tells me he will now hasten down into the country,
as soon as he can get some money settled on the Wardrobe. Here meeting
Creed, he and I down to the Hall, and I having at Michell’s shop wrote
a little letter to Mr. Gauden, to go with his horse, and excusing my not
taking leave or so much as asking after the old lady the widow when we
came away the other day from them, he and I over the water to Fox Hall,
and there sent away the horse with my letter, and then to the new Spring
Garden, walking up and down, but things being dear and little attendance
to be had we went away, leaving much brave company there, and so to a
less house hard by, where we liked very well their Codlin tarts, having
not time, as we intended, to stay the getting ready of a dish of pease.
And there came to us an idle boy to show us some tumbling tricks, which
he did very well, and the greatest bending of his body that ever I
observed in my life. Thence by water to White Hall, and walked over the
Park to St. James’s; but missed Mr. Coventry, he not being within; and
so out again, and there the Duke was coming along the Pell-Mell. It
being a little darkish, I staid not to take notice of him, but we went
directly back again. And in our walk over the Park, one of the Duke’s
footmen came running behind us, and came looking just in our faces to
see who we were, and went back again. What his meaning is I know not,
but was fearful that I might not go far enough with my hat off, though
methinks that should not be it, besides, there were others covered
nearer than myself was, but only it was my fear. So to White Hall and by
water to the Bridge, and so home to bed, weary and well pleased with my
journey in all respects. Only it cost me about 20s., but it was for my
health, and I hope will prove so, only I do find by my riding a little
swelling to rise just by my anus. I had the same the last time I rode,
and then it fell again, and now it is up again about the bigness of the
bag of a silkworm, makes me fearful of a rupture. But I will speak to
Mr. Hollyard about it, and I am glad to find it now, that I may prevent
it before it goes too far.