12th, 1643.  He was called by Cromwell “the sober young man and the
     godly cavalier.”  After the Restoration he was M.P. for Cambridge
     (1661), and appointed Master of the Ordnance.  He died in Drury
     Lane, suddenly, as stated in the text, and was buried at Compton
     Wynyates, Warwickshire.]

I find the sober men of the Court troubled for him; and yet not so as to
hinder or lessen their mirth, talking, laughing, and eating, drinking,
and doing every thing else, just as if there was no such thing, which is
as good an instance for me hereafter to judge of death, both as to the
unavoidableness, suddenness, and little effect of it upon the spirits of
others, let a man be never so high, or rich, or good; but that all die
alike, no more matter being made of the death of one than another,
and that even to die well, the praise of it is not considerable in the
world, compared to the many in the world that know not nor make anything
of it, nor perhaps to them (unless to one that like this poor gentleman,
who is one of a thousand, there nobody speaking ill of him) that will
speak ill of a man. Coming to St. James’s, I hear that the Queen did
sleep five hours pretty well to-night, and that she waked and gargled
her mouth, and to sleep again; but that her pulse beats fast, beating
twenty to the King’s or my Lady Suffolk’s eleven; but not so strong as
it was. It seems she was so ill as to be shaved and pidgeons put to her
feet, and to have the extreme unction given her by the priests, who were
so long about it that the doctors were angry. The King, they all say;
is most fondly disconsolate for her, and weeps by her, which makes her
weep;

     [“The queen was given over by her physicians,..., and the
     good nature of the king was much affected with the situation in
     which he saw!  a princess whom, though he did not love her, yet he
     greatly esteemed.  She loved him tenderly, and thinking that it was
     the last time she should ever speak to him, she told him ‘That the
     concern he showed for her death was enough to make her quit life
     with regret; but that not possessing charms sufficient to merit his
     tenderness, she had at least the consolation in dying to give place
     to a consort who might be more worthy, of it and to whom heaven,
     perhaps, might grant a blessing that had been refused to her.’  At
     these words she bathed his hands with some tears which he thought
     would be her last; he mingled his own with hers, and without
     supposing she would take him at his word, he conjured her to live
     for his sake.”--Grammont Memoirs, chap.  vii.]

which one this day told me he reckons a good sign, for that it carries
away some rheume from the head. This morning Captain Allen tells me how
the famous Ned Mullins, by a slight fall, broke his leg at the ancle,
which festered; and he had his leg cut off on Saturday, but so ill done,
notwithstanding all the great chyrurgeons about the town at the doing
of it, that they fear he will not live with it, which is very strange,
besides the torment he was put to with it. After being a little with
the Duke, and being invited to dinner to my Lord Barkeley’s, and so, not
knowing how to spend our time till noon, Sir W. Batten and I took coach,
and to the Coffee-house in Cornhill;

     [This may be the Coffee House in Exchange Alley, which had for a
     sign, Morat the Great, or The Great Turk, where coffee was sold in
     berry, in powder, and pounded in a mortar.  There is a token of the
     house, see “Boyne’s Tokens,” ed.  Williamson, vol.  i., p.  592.]

where much talk about the Turk’s proceedings, and that the plague is got
to Amsterdam, brought by a ship from Argier; and it is also carried to
Hambrough. The Duke says the King purposes to forbid any of their
ships coming into the river. The Duke also told us of several Christian
commanders (French) gone over to the Turks to serve them; and upon
inquiry I find that the King of France do by this aspire to the Empire,
and so to get the Crown of Spayne also upon the death of the King, which
is very probable, it seems. Back to St. James’s, and there dined with
my Lord Barkeley and his lady, where Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Batten,
and myself, with two gentlemen more; my Lady, and one of the ladies of
honour to the Duchesse (no handsome woman, but a most excellent hand).
A fine French dinner, and so we after dinner broke up and to Creed’s new
lodgings in Axe-yard, which I like very well and so with him to White
Hall and walked up and down in the galleries with good discourse, and
anon Mr. Coventry and Povy, sad for the loss of one of our number we sat
down as a Committee for Tangier and did some business and so broke up,
and I down with Mr. Coventry and in his chamber discoursing of business
of the office and Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten’s carriage, when he
most ingeniously tells me how they have carried themselves to him in
forbearing to speak the other day to the Duke what they know they have
so largely at other times said to him, and I told him what I am put to
about the bargain for masts. I perceive he thinks of it all and will
remember it. Thence took up my wife at Mrs. Harper’s where she and Jane
were, and so called at the New Exchange for some things for her, and
then at Tom’s went up and saw his house now it is finished, and indeed
it is very handsome, but he not within and so home and to my office; and
then to supper and to bed.