16th. Up, and being ready then abroad by coach to White Hall, and there
with the Duke, where Mr. Coventry did a second time go to vindicate
himself against reports and prove by many testimonies that he brought,
that he did nothing but what had been done by the Lord Admiral’s
secretaries heretofore, though he do not approve of it, nor since he
had any rule from the Duke hath he exceeded what he is there directed to
take, and the thing I think is very clear that they always did take and
that now he do take less than ever they did heretofore. Thence away, and
Sir G. Carteret did call me to him and discourse with me about my letter
yesterday, and did seem to take it unkindly that I should doubt of his
satisfaction in the bargain of masts, and did promise me that hereafter
whatever he do hear to my prejudice he would tell me before he would
believe it, and that this was only Sir W. Batten’s report in this
business, which he says he did ever approve of, in which I know he lies.
Thence to my Lord’s lodgings thinking to find Mr. Moore, in order to the
sending away my letter of reproof to my Lord, but I do not find him,
but contrary do find my Lord come to Court, which I am glad to hear and
should be more glad to hear that he do follow his business that I may
not have occasion to venture upon his good nature by such a provocation
as my letter will be to him. So by coach home, to the Exchange, where
I talked about several businesses with several people, and so home to
dinner with my wife, and then in the afternoon to my office, and there
late, and in the evening Mr. Hollyard came, and he and I about our great
work to look upon my wife’s malady, which he did, and it seems her
great conflux of humours, heretofore that did use to swell there, did
in breaking leave a hollow which has since gone in further and further;
till now it is near three inches deep, but as God will have it do not
run into the bodyward, but keeps to the outside of the skin, and so he
must be forced to cut it open all along, and which my heart I doubt will
not serve for me to see done, and yet she will not have any body else
to see it done, no, not her own mayds, and so I must do it, poor wretch,
for her. To-morrow night he is to do it. He being gone, I to my office
again a little while, and so home to supper and to bed.