7th. Up pretty betimes, and awhile to my vyall, and then abroad to
several places, to buy things for the furnishing my house and my wife’s
closet, and then met my uncle Thomas, by appointment, and he and I to
the Prerogative Office in Paternoster Row, and there searched and found
my uncle Day’s will, end read it over and advised upon it, and his
wife’s after him, and though my aunt Perkins testimony is very good, yet
I fear the estate being great, and the rest that are able to inform us
in the matter are all possessed of more or less of the estate, it will
be hard for us ever to do anything, nor will I adventure anything till
I see what part will be given to us by my uncle Thomas of all that is
gained. But I had another end of putting my uncle into some doubt, that
so I might keep him: yet from going into the country that he may be
there against the Court at his own charge, and so I left him and his son
at a loss what to do till I see them again. And so I to my Lord Crew’s,
thinking to have dined there, but it was too late, and so back and
called at my brother’s and Mr. Holden’s about several businesses, and
went all alone to the Black Spread Eagle in Bride Lane, and there had a
chopp of veale and some bread, cheese, and beer, cost me a shilling to
my dinner, and so through Fleet Ally, God forgive me, out of an itch
to look upon the sluts there, against which when I saw them my stomach
turned, and so to Bartholomew Fayre, where I met with Mr. Pickering, and
he and I to see the monkeys at the Dutch house, which is far beyond
the other that my wife and I saw the other day; and thence to see the
dancing on the ropes, which was very poor and tedious. But he and I fell
in discourse about my Lord Sandwich. He tells me how he is sorry for
my Lord at his being at Chelsey, and that his but seeming so to my Lord
without speaking one word, had put him clear out of my Lord’s favour,
so as that he was fain to leave him before he went into the country, for
that he was put to eat with his servants; but I could not fish from him,
though I knew it, what was the matter; but am very sorry to see that
my Lord hath thus much forgot his honour, but am resolved not to meddle
with it. The play being done, I stole from him and hied home, buying
several things at the ironmonger’s--dogs, tongs, and shovels--for my
wife’s closett and the rest of my house, and so home, and thence to
my office awhile, and so home to supper and to bed. By my letters from
Tangier today I hear that it grows very strong by land, and the Mole
goes on. They have lately killed two hundred of the Moores, and lost
about forty or fifty. I am mightily afeard of laying out too much money
in goods upon my house, but it is not money flung away, though I
reckon nothing money but when it is in the bank, till I have a good sum
beforehand in the world.