13th. Up and betimes to Thames Street among the tarr men, to look the
price of tarr and so by water to Whitehall thinking to speak with Sir
G. Carteret, but he lying in the city all night, and meeting with Mr.
Cutler the merchant, I with him in his coach into the city to Sir G.
Carteret, but missing him there, he and I walked to find him at Sir Tho.
Allen’s in Bread Street, where not finding him he and I walked towards
our office, he discoursing well of the business of the Navy, and
particularly of the victualling, in which he was once I perceive
concerned, and he and I parted and I to the office and there had a
difference with Sir W. Batten about Mr. Bowyer’s tarr, which I am
resolved to cross, though he sent me last night, as a bribe, a barrel of
sturgeon, which, it may be, I shall send back, for I will not have
the King abused so abominably in the price of what we buy, by Sir W.
Batten’s corruption and underhand dealing. So from the office, Mr. Wayth
with me, to the Parliament House, and there I spoke and told Sir
G. Carteret all, with which he is well pleased, and do recall his
willingness yesterday, it seems, to Sir W. Batten, that we should buy a
great quantity of tarr, being abused by him. Thence with Mr. Wayth after
drinking a cupp of ale at the Swan, talking of the corruption of the
Navy, by water. I landed him at Whitefriars, and I to the Exchange, and
so home to dinner, where I found my wife’s brother, and thence after
dinner by water to the Royall Theatre, where I resolved to bid farewell,
as shall appear by my oaths tomorrow against all plays either at
publique houses or Court till Christmas be over. Here we saw “The
Faithfull Sheepheardesse,” a most simple thing, and yet much thronged
after, and often shown, but it is only for the scenes’ sake, which is
very fine indeed and worth seeing; but I am quite out of opinion with
any of their actings, but Lacy’s, compared with the other house. Thence
to see Mrs. Hunt, which we did and were much made of; and in our way saw
my Lady Castlemaine, who, I fear, is not so handsome as I have taken her
for, and now she begins to decay something. This is my wife’s opinion
also, for which I am sorry. Thence by coach, with a mad coachman, that
drove like mad, and down byeways, through Bucklersbury home, everybody
through the street cursing him, being ready to run over them. So
home, and after writing letters by the post, home to supper and bed.
Yesterday, upon conference with the King in the Banqueting House, the
Parliament did agree with much ado, it being carried but by forty-two
voices, that they would supply him with a sum of money; but what and how
is not yet known, but expected to be done with great disputes the next
week. But if done at all, it is well.