6th. Slept pretty well, and my wife waked to ring the bell to call up
our mayds to the washing about 4 o’clock, and I was and she angry that
our bell did not wake them sooner, but I will get a bigger bell. So we
to sleep again till 8 o’clock, and then I up in some ease to the office,
where we had a full board, where we examined Cocke’s second account,
when Mr. Turner had drawn a bill directly to be paid the balance
thereof, as Mr. Cocke demanded, and Sir J. Minnes did boldly assert the
truth of it, and that he had examined it, when there is no such thing,
but many vouchers, upon examination, missing, and we saw reason to
strike off several of his demands, and to bring down his 5 per cent.
commission to 3 per cent. So we shall save the King some money, which
both the Comptroller and his clerke had absolutely given away. There
was also two occasions more of difference at the table; the one being
to make out a bill to Captain Smith for his salary abroad as
commander-in-chief in the Streights. Sir J. Minnes did demand an
increase of salary for his being Vice-Admiral in the Downes, he having
received but 40s. without an increase, when Sir J. Lawson, in the same
voyage, had L3, and others have also had increase, only he, because
he was an officer of the board, was worse used than any body else, and
particularly told Sir W. Batten that he was the opposer formerly of his
having an increase, which I did wonder to hear him so boldly lay it to
him. So we hushed up the dispute, and offered, if he would, to examine
precedents, and report them, if there was any thing to his advantage
to be found, to the Duke. The next was, Mr. Chr. Pett and Deane were
summoned to give an account of some knees

     [“Naturally grown timber or bars of iron bent to a right angle or to
     fit the surfaces and to secure bodies firmly together as hanging
     knees secure the deck beams to the sides.”--Smyth’s Sailor’s Word-
     Book.  There are several kinds of knees.]

which Pett reported bad, that were to be served in by Sir W. Warren,
we having contracted that none should be served but such as were to be
approved of by our officers. So that if they were bad they were to be
blamed for receiving them. Thence we fell to talk of Warren’s other
goods, which Pett had said were generally bad, and falling to this
contract again, I did say it was the most cautious and as good a
contract as had been made here, and the only [one] that had been in such
terms. Sir J. Minnes told me angrily that Winter’s timber, bought for