16th. Up and by coach with Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes to White
Hall, and, after we had done our usual business with the Duke, to my
Lord Sandwich and by his desire to Sir W. Wheeler, who was brought down
in a sedan chair from his chamber, being lame of the gout, to borrow
L1000 of him for my Lord’s occasions, but he gave me a very kind denial
that he could not, but if any body else would, he would be bond with my
Lord for it. So to Westminster Hall, and there find great expectation
what the Parliament will do, when they come two days hence to sit again,
in matters of religion. The great question is, whether the Presbyters
will be contented to have the Papists have the same liberty of
conscience with them, or no, or rather be denied it themselves: and
the Papists, I hear, are very busy designing how to make the Presbyters
consent to take their liberty, and to let them have the same with them,
which some are apt to think they will. It seems a priest was taken
in his vests officiating somewhere in Holborn the other day, and was
committed by Secretary Morris, according to law; and they say the Bishop
of London did give him thanks for it. Thence to my Lord Crew’s and dined
there, there being much company, and the above-said matter is now the
present publique discourse. Thence about several businesses to Mr.
Phillips my attorney, to stop all proceedings at law, and so to the
Temple, where at the Solicitor General’s I found Mr. Cholmely and Creed
reading to him the agreement for him to put into form about the contract
for the Mole at Tangier, which is done at 13s. the Cubical yard,
though upon my conscience not one of the Committee, besides the parties
concerned, do understand what they do therein, whether they give
too much or too little. Thence with Mr. Creed to see Mr. Moore, who
continues sick still, within doors, and here I staid a good while after
him talking of all the things either business or no that came into my
mind, and so home and to see Sir W. Pen, and sat and played at cards
with him, his daughter, and Mrs. Rooth, and so to my office a while, and
then home and to bed.