15th. Up pretty betimes and rode as far as Godmanehester, Mr. Moore
having two falls, once in water and another in dirt, and there ‘light
and eat and drunk, being all of us very weary, but especially my uncle
and wife. Thence to Brampton to my father’s, and there found all well,
but not sensible how they ought to treat my uncle and his son, at least
till the Court be over, which vexed me, but on my counsel they
carried it fair to them; and so my father, cozen Thomas, and I up to
Hinchingbroke, where I find my Lord and his company gone to Boughton,
which vexed me; but there I find my Lady and the young ladies, and there
I alone with my Lady two hours, she carrying me through every part of
the house and gardens, which are, and will be, mighty noble indeed. Here
I saw Mrs. Betty Pickering, who is a very well-bred and comely lady, but
very fat. Thence, without so much as drinking, home with my father and
cozen, who staid for me, and to a good supper; after I had had an hour’s
talk with my father abroad in the fields, wherein he begun to talk very
highly of my promises to him of giving him the profits of Sturtlow, as
if it were nothing that I give him out of my purse, and that he would
have me to give this also from myself to my brothers and sister; I mean
Brampton and all, I think: I confess I was angry to hear him talk in
that manner, and took him up roundly in it, and advised him if he could
not live upon L50 per ann., which was another part of his discourse,
that he would think to come and live at Tom’s again, where L50 per ann.
will be a good addition to Tom’s trade, and I think that must be done
when all is done. But my father spoke nothing more of it all the time I
was in the country, though at the time he seemed to like it well enough.
I also spoke with Piggott too this evening before I went in to supper,
and doubt that I shall meet with some knots in my business to-morrow
before I can do it at the Court, but I shall do my best. After supper
my uncle and his son to Stankes’s to bed, which troubles me, all our
father’s beds being lent to Hinchingbroke, and so my wife and I to bed,
she very weary.