2d. Up, and by coach to White Hall, and there in the long Matted Gallery
I find Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W. Batten--and by and by
comes the King to walk there with three or four with him; and soon as
he saw us, says he, “Here is the Navy Office,” and there walked twenty
turns the length of the gallery, talking, methought, but ordinary talke.
By and by came the Duke, and he walked, and at last they went into the
Duke’s lodgings. The King staid so long that we could not discourse with
the Duke, and so we parted. I heard the Duke say that he was going to
wear a perriwigg; and they say the King also will. I never till this
day observed that the King is mighty gray. Thence, meeting with Creed,
walked with him to Westminster Hall, and thence by coach took up Mrs.
Hunt, and carried her towards my house, and we light at the ‘Change, and
sent her to my house, Creed and I to the Coffeehouse, and then to the
‘Change, and so home, and carried a barrel of oysters with us, and so
to dinner, and after a good dinner left Mrs. Hunt and my wife making
marmalett of quinces, and Creed and I to the perriwigg makers, but it
being dark concluded of nothing, and so Creed went away, and I with Sir
W. Pen, who spied me in the street, in his coach home. There found them
busy still, and I up to my vyall. Anon, the comfiture being well done,
my wife and I took Mrs. Hunt at almost 9 at night by coach and carried
Mrs. Hunt home, and did give her a box of sugar and a haunch of venison
given me by my Lady the other day. We did not ‘light, but saw her
within doors, and straight home, where after supper there happening some
discourse where my wife thought she had taken Jane in a lie, she told
me of it mighty triumphantly, but I, not seeing reason to conclude it a
lie, was vexed, and my wife and I to very high words, wherein I up to
my chamber, and she by and by followed me up, and to very bad words from
her to me, calling me perfidious and man of no conscience, whatever I
pretend to, and I know not what, which troubled me mightily, and though
I would allow something to her passion, yet I see again and again that
she spoke but somewhat of what she had in her heart. But I tempered
myself very well, so as that though we went to bed with discontent she
yielded to me and began to be fond, so that being willing myself to
peace, we did before we sleep become very good friends, it being past 12
o’clock, and so with good hearts and joy to rest.