23rd: Up and to Alderman Backwell’s, where Sir W. Rider, by appointment,
met us to consult about the insuring of our hempe ship from Archangell,
in which we are all much concerned, by my Lord Treasurer’s command. That
being put in a way I went to Mr. Beacham, one of our jury, to confer
with him about our business with Field at our trial to-morrow, and
thence to St. Paul’s Churchyarde, and there bespoke “Rushworth’s
Collections,” and “Scobell’s Acts of the Long Parliament,”’ &c., which
I will make the King pay for as to the office; and so I do not break my
vow at all. Back to the Coffee-house, and then to the ‘Change, where Sir
W. Rider and I did bid 15 per cent., and nobody will take it under 20
per cent., and the lowest was 15 per cent. premium, and 15 more to be
abated in case of losse, which we did not think fit without order to
give, and so we parted, and I home to a speedy, though too good a dinner
to eat alone, viz., a good goose and a rare piece of roast beef. Thence
to the Temple, but being there too soon and meeting Mr. Moore I took him
up and to my Lord Treasurer’s, and thence to Sir Ph. Warwick’s, where
I found him and did desire his advice, who left me to do what I thought
fit in this business of the insurance, and so back again to the Temple
all the way telling Mr. Moore what had passed between my Lord and me
yesterday, and indeed my fears do grow that my Lord will not reform as
I hoped he would nor have the ingenuity to take my advice as he ought
kindly. But however I am satisfied that the one person whom he said he
would take leave to except is not Mr. Moore, and so W. Howe I am sure
could tell him nothing of my letter that ever he saw it. Here Mr. Moore
and I parted, and I up to the Speaker’s chamber, and there met Mr.
Coventry by appointment to discourse about Field’s business, and thence
we parting I homewards and called at the Coffeehouse, and there by
great accident hear that a letter is come that our ship is safe come
to Newcastle. With this news I went like an asse presently to Alderman
Backewell and, told him of it, and he and I went to the African House
in Broad Street to have spoke with Sir W. Rider to tell him of it, but
missed him. Now what an opportunity had I to have concealed this and
seemed to have made an insurance and got L100 with the least trouble
and danger in the whole world. This troubles me to think I should be
so oversoon. So back again with Alderman Backewell talking of the new
money, which he says will never be counterfeited, he believes; but it is
deadly inconvenient for telling, it is so thick, and the edges are made
to turn up. I found him as full of business, and, to speak the truth,
he is a very painfull man, and ever was, and now-a-days is well paid
for it. So home and to my office, doing business late in order to the
getting a little money, and so home to supper and to bed.