15th. Up betimes and walked to St. James’s, where Mr. Coventry being in
bed I walked in the Park, discoursing with the keeper of the Pell Mell,
who was sweeping of it; who told me of what the earth is mixed that do
floor the Mall, and that over all there is cockle-shells powdered, and
spread to keep it fast; which, however, in dry weather, turns to dust
and deads the ball. Thence to Mr. Coventry; and sitting by his bedside,
he did tell me that he sent for me to discourse upon my Lord Sandwich’s
allowances for his several pays, and what his thoughts are concerning
his demands; which he could not take the freedom to do face to face,
it being not so proper as by me: and did give me a most friendly and
ingenuous account of all; telling me how unsafe, at this juncture, while
every man’s, and his actions particularly, are descanted upon, it is
either for him to put the Duke upon doing, or my Lord himself to desire
anything extraordinary, ‘specially the King having been so bountifull
already; which the world takes notice of even to some repinings. All
which he did desire me to discourse with my Lord of; which I have
undertook to do. We talked also of our office in general, with which he
told me that he was now-a-days nothing so satisfied as he was wont to
be. I confess I told him things are ordered in that way that we must
of necessity break in a little time a pieces. After done with him about
these things, he told me that for Mr. Hater the Duke’s word was in short
that he found he had a good servant, an Anabaptist, and unless he did
carry himself more to the scandal of the office, he would bear with
his opinion till he heard further, which do please me very much.
Thence walked to Westminster, and there up and down in the Hall and the
Parliament House all the morning; at noon by coach to my Lord Crew’s,
hearing that Lord Sandwich did dine there; where I told him what had
passed between Mr. Coventry and myself; with which he was contented,
though I could perceive not very well pleased. And I do believe that my
Lord do find some other things go against his mind in the House; for in
the motion made the other day in the House by my Lord Bruce, that none
be capable of employment but such as have been loyal and constant to
the King and Church, the General [Monk] and my Lord were mentioned to be
excepted; and my Lord Bruce did come since to my Lord, to clear himself
that he meant nothing to his prejudice, nor could it have any such
effect if he did mean it. After discourse with my Lord; to dinner with
him; there dining there my Lord Montagu of Boughton, Mr. William Montagu
his brother, the Queen’s Sollicitor, &c., and a fine dinner. Their
talk about a ridiculous falling-out two days ago at my Lord of Oxford’s
house, at an entertainment of his, there being there my Lord of
Albemarle, Lynsey, two of the Porters, my Lord Bellasses, and others,
where there were high words and some blows, and pulling off of
perriwiggs; till my Lord Monk took away some of their swords, and sent
for some soldiers to guard the house till the fray was ended. To such a
degree of madness the nobility of this age is come! After dinner I went
up to Sir Thomas Crew, who lies there not very well in his head, being
troubled with vapours and fits of dizziness: and there I sat talking
with him all the afternoon from one discourse to another, the most was
upon the unhappy posture of things at this time; that the King do mind
nothing but pleasures, and hates the very sight or thoughts of business;
that my Lady Castlemaine rules him, who, he says, hath all the tricks of
Aretin

     [An allusion to Aretin’s infamous letters and sonnets accompanying
     the as infamous “Postures” engraved by Marc Antonio from the designs
     of Julio Romano (Steinman’s “Memoir of Barbara, Duchess of
     Cleveland,” privately printed, 1871).]

that are to be practised to give pleasure. In which he is too able ....
but what is the unhappiness in that, as the Italian proverb says, “lazzo
dritto non vuolt consiglio.” If any of the sober counsellors give him
good advice, and move him in anything that is to his good and honour,
the other part, which are his counsellers of pleasure, take him when
he is with my Lady Castlemaine, and in a humour of delight, and then
persuade him that he ought not to hear nor listen to the advice of those
old dotards or counsellors that were heretofore his enemies: when, God
knows! it is they that now-a-days do most study his honour. It seems the
present favourites now are my Lord Bristol, Duke of Buckingham, Sir H.
Bennet, my Lord Ashley, and Sir Charles Barkeley; who, among them, have
cast my Lord Chancellor upon his back, past ever getting up again; there
being now little for him to do, and he waits at Court attending to speak
to the King as others do: which I pray God may prove of good effects,
for it is feared it will be the same with my Lord Treasurer shortly. But
strange to hear how my Lord Ashley, by my Lord Bristol’s means (he being
brought over to the Catholique party against the Bishopps, whom he hates
to the death, and publicly rails against them; not that he is become a
Catholique, but merely opposes the Bishopps; and yet, for aught I hear,
the Bishopp of London keeps as great with the King as ever) is got into
favour, so much that, being a man of great business and yet of pleasure,
and drolling too, he, it is thought, will be made Lord Treasurer upon
the death or removal of the good old man. My Lord Albemarle, I hear,
do bear through and bustle among them, and will not be removed from the
King’s good opinion and favour, though none of the Cabinett; but yet
he is envied enough. It is made very doubtful whether the King do not
intend the making of the Duke of Monmouth legitimate;

     [Thomas Ross, Monmouth’s tutor, put the idea into his head that
     Charles II. had married his mother.  The report was sedulously
     spread abroad, and obtained some kind of credence, until, in June,