13th. Lay long in bed with my wife talking of family matters, and so
up and to the office, where we sat all the’ morning, and then home to
dinner, and after dinner my wife and I to talk again about getting of a
couple of good mayds and to part with Ashwell, which troubles me for her
father’s sake, though I shall be glad to have the charge taken away of
keeping a woman. Thence a little to the office, and so abroad with my
wife by water to White Hall, and there at my Lord’s lodgings met my Lady
Jemimah, with whom we staid a good while. Thence to Mrs. Hunt’s, where
I left my wife, and I to walk a little in St. James’s Park, while Mrs.
Harper might come home, with whom we came to speak about her kinswoman
Jane Gentleman to come and live with us as a chamber mayde, and there
met with Mr. Hoole my old acquaintance of Magdalen, and walked with him
an hour in the Parke, discoursing chiefly of Sir Samuel Morland, whose
lady is gone into France. It seems he buys ground and a farm in the
country, and lays out money upon building, and God knows what! so that
most of the money he sold his pension of L500 per annum for, to Sir
Arthur Slingsby, is believed is gone. It seems he hath very great
promises from the King, and Hoole hath seen some of the King’s letters,
under his own hand, to Morland, promising him great things (and among
others, the order of the Garter, as Sir Samuel says); but his lady
thought it below her to ask any thing at the King’s first coming,
believing the King would do it of himself, when as Hoole do really think
if he had asked to be Secretary of State at the King’s first coming, he
might have had it. And the other day at her going into France, she did
speak largely to the King herself, how her husband hath failed of what
his Majesty had promised, and she was sure intended him; and the King
did promise still, as he is a King and a gentleman, to be as good as his
word in a little time, to a tittle: but I never believe it. Here in the
Park I met with Mr. Coventry, where he sent for a letter he had
newly writ to me, wherein he had enclosed one from Commissioner Pett
complaining of his being defeated in his attempt to suspend two pursers,
wherein the manner of his doing it, and complaint of our seeing him
(contrary to our promises the other day), deserted, did make us laugh
mightily, and was good sport to think how awkwardly he goes about a
thing that he has no courage of his own nor mind to do. Mr. Coventry
answered it very handsomely, but I perceive Pett has left off his
corresponding with me any more. Thence to fetch my wife from Mrs.
Hunt’s, where now he was come in, and we eat and drunk, and so away
(their child being at home, a very lively, but not pretty at all), by
water to Mrs. Turner’s, and there made a short visit, and so home by
coach, and after supper to prayers and to bed, and before going to bed
Ashwell began to make her complaint, and by her I do perceive that she
has received most base usage from my wife, which my wife sillily
denies, but it is impossible the wench could invent words and matter
so particularly, against which my wife has nothing to say but flatly to
deny, which I am sorry to see, and blows to have past, and high words
even at Hinchinbrooke House among my Lady’s people, of which I am
mightily ashamed. I said nothing to either of them, but let them talk
till she was gone and left us abed, and then I told my wife my mind with
great sobriety of grief, and so to sleep.