21st. Up betimes and among my joyners, and to my office, where the
joyners are also laying mouldings in the inside of my closet. Then
abroad and by water to White Hall, and there got Sir G. Carteret to sign
me my last quarter’s bills for my wages, and meeting with Mr. Creed he
told me how my Lord Teviott hath received another attaque from Guyland
at Tangier with 10,000 men, and at last, as is said, is come, after a
personal treaty with him, to a good understanding and peace with him.
Thence to my brother’s, and there told him how my girl has served us
which he sent me, and directed him to get my clothes again, and get the
girl whipped. So to other places by the way about small businesses, and
so home, and after looking over all my workmen, I went by water and land
to Deptford, and there found by appointment Sir W. Batten, but he was
got to Mr. Waith’s to dinner, where I dined with him, a good dinner
and good discourse, and his wife, I believe, a good woman. We fell in
discourse of Captain Cocke, and how his lady has lost all her fine linen
almost, but besides that they say she gives out she had L3000 worth of
linen, which we all laugh at, and Sir W. Batten (who I perceive is
not so fond of the Captain as he used to be, and less of her, from
her slight receiving of him and his lady it seems once) told me how he
should say that he see he must spend L700 per ann. get it how he could,
which was a high speech, and by all men’s discover, his estate not
good enough to spend so much. After dinner altered our design to go
to Woolwich, and put it off to to-morrow morning, and so went all to
Greenwich (Mrs. Waith excepted, who went thither, but not to the
same house with us, but to her father’s, that lives there), to the
musique-house, where we had paltry musique, till the master organist
came, whom by discourse I afterwards knew, having employed him for my
Lord Sandwich, to prick out something (his name Arundell), and he did
give me a fine voluntary or two, and so home by water, and at home I
find my girl that run away brought by a bedel of St. Bride’s Parish,
and stripped her and sent her away, and a newe one come, of Griffin’s
helping to, which I think will prove a pretty girl. Her name, Susan,
and so to supper after having this evening paid Mr. Hunt L3 for my viall
(besides the carving which I paid this day 10s. for to the carver), and
he tells me that I may, without flattery, say, I have as good a Theorbo
viall and viallin as is in England. So to bed.