25th. Up and to Sir G. Carteret’s house, and with him by coach to
Whitehall. He uses me mighty well to my great joy, and in our discourse
took occasion to tell me that as I did desire of him the other day so he
desires of me the same favour that we may tell one another at any time
any thing that passes among us at the office or elsewhere wherein we are
either dissatisfied one with another, and that I should find him in
all things as kind and ready to serve me as my own brother. This
methinks-was very sudden and extraordinary and do please me mightily,
and I am resolved by no means ever to lose him again if I can. He
told me that he did still observe my care for the King’s service in my
office. He set me down in Fleet Street and thence I by another coach to
my Lord Sandwich’s, and there I did present him Mr. Barlow’s “Terella,”
 with which he was very much pleased, and he did show me great kindnesse,
and by other discourse I have reason to think that he is not at all, as
I feared he would be, discontented against me more than the trouble of
the thing will work upon him. I left him in good humour, and I to White
Hall, to the Duke of York and Mr. Coventry, and there advised about
insuring the hempe ship at 12 per cent., notwithstanding her being come
to Newcastle, and I do hope that in all my three places which are now
my hopes and supports I may not now fear any thing, but with care, which
through the Lord’s blessing I will never more neglect, I don’t doubt but
to keep myself up with them all. For in the Duke, and Mr. Coventry,
my Lord Sandwich and Sir G. Carteret I place my greatest hopes, and it
pleased me yesterday that Mr. Coventry in the coach (he carrying me to
the Exchange at noon from the office) did, speaking of Sir W. Batten,
say that though there was a difference between them, yet he would
embrace any good motion of Sir W. Batten to the King’s advantage as well
as of Mr. Pepys’ or any friend he had. And when I talked that I would go
about doing something of the Controller’s work when I had time, and that
I thought the Controller would not take it ill, he wittily replied that
there was nothing in the world so hateful as a dog in the manger. Back
by coach to the Exchange, there spoke with Sir W. Rider about insuring,
and spoke with several other persons about business, and shall become
pretty well known quickly. Thence home to dinner with my poor wife, and
with great joy to my office, and there all the afternoon about business,
and among others Mr. Bland came to me and had good discourse, and he has
chose me a referee for him in a business, and anon in the evening comes
Sir W. Warren, and he and I had admirable discourse. He advised me in
things I desired about, bummary,--[bottomry]--and other ways of putting
out money as in parts of ships, how dangerous they are, and lastly fell
to talk of the Dutch management of the Navy, and I think will helpe me
to some accounts of things of the Dutch Admiralty, which I am mighty
desirous to know. He seemed to have been mighty privy with my Lord
Albemarle in things before this great turn, and to the King’s dallying
with him and others for some years before, but I doubt all was not very
true. However, his discourse is very useful in general, though he would
seem a little more than ordinary in this. Late at night home to supper
and to bed, my mind in good ease all but my health, of which I am not a
little doubtful.