7th. Up and to my office a little, and then to Brown’s for my measuring
rule, which is made, and is certainly the best and the most commodious
for carrying in one’s pocket, and most useful that ever was made, and
myself have the honour of being as it were the inventor of this form of
it. Here I staid discoursing an hour with him and then home, and thither
came Sir Fairbrother to me, and we walked a while together in the garden
and then abroad into the cittie, and then we parted for a while and I
to my Viall, which I find done and once varnished, and it will please
me very well when it is quite varnished. Thence home and to study my new
rule till my head aked cruelly. So by and by to dinner and the Doctor
and Mr. Creed came to me. The Doctor’s discourse, which (though he be
a very good-natured man) is but simple, was some sport to me and Creed,
though my head akeing I took no great pleasure in it. We parted after
dinner, and I walked to Deptford and there found Sir W. Pen, and I fell
to measuring of some planks that was serving into the yard, which the
people took notice of, and the measurer himself was amused at, for I
did it much more ready than he, and I believe Sir W. Pen would be glad
I could have done less or he more. By and by he went away and I staid
walking up and down, discoursing with the officers of the yard of
several things, and so walked back again, and on my way young Bagwell
and his wife waylayd me to desire my favour about getting him a better
ship, which I shall pretend to be willing to do for them, but my mind is
to know his wife a little better. They being parted I went with Cadbury
the mast maker to view a parcel of good masts which I think it were
good to buy, and resolve to speak to the board about it. So home, and
my brother John and I up and I to my musique, and then to discourse
with him, and I find him not so thorough a philosopher, at least
in Aristotle, as I took him for, he not being able to tell me the
definition of final nor which of the 4 Qualitys belonged to each of the