11th. Up and to my office, whither, by and by, my brother Tom came, and
I did soundly rattle him for his neglecting to see and please the Joyces
as he has of late done. I confess I do fear that he do not understand
his business, nor will do any good in his trade, though he tells me that
he do please every body and that he gets money, but I shall not believe
it till I see a state of his accounts, which I have ordered him to bring
me before he sees me any more. We met and sat at the office all the
morning, and at noon I to the ‘Change, where I met Dr. Pierce, who tells
me that the King comes to towne this day, from Tunbridge, to stay a day
or two, and then fetch the Queen from thence, who he says is grown a
very debonnaire lady, and now hugs him, and meets him gallopping upon
the road, and all the actions of a fond and pleasant lady that can be,
that he believes has a chat now and then of Mrs. Stewart, but that there
is no great danger of her, she being only an innocent, young, raw girl;
but my Lady Castlemaine, who rules the King in matters of state, and do
what she list with him, he believes is now falling quite out of favour.
After the Queen is come back she goes to the Bath; and so to Oxford,
where great entertainments are making for her. This day I am told that
my Lord Bristoll hath warrants issued out against him, to have carried
him to the Tower; but he is fled away, or hid himself. So much the
Chancellor hath got the better of him. Upon the ‘Change my brother, and
Will bring me word that Madam Turner would come and dine with me to-day,
so I hasted home and found her and Mrs. Morrice there (The. Joyce being
gone into the country), which is the reason of the mother rambling. I
got a dinner for them, and after dinner my uncle Thomas and aunt Bell
came and saw me, and I made them almost foxed with wine till they were
very kind (but I did not carry them up to my ladies). So they went away,
and so my two ladies and I in Mrs. Turner’s coach to Mr. Povy’s,
who being not within, we went in and there shewed Mrs. Turner his
perspective and volary,

     [A large birdcage, in which the birds can fly about; French
     ‘voliere’.  Ben Jonson uses the word volary.]

and the fine things that he is building of now, which is a most neat
thing. Thence to the Temple and by water to Westminster; and there
Morrice and I went to Sir R. Ling’s to have fetched a niece of his, but
she was not within, and so we went to boat again and then down to the
bridge, and there tried to find a sister of Mrs. Morrice’s, but she was
not within neither, and so we went through bridge, and I carried them
on board the King’s pleasure-boat, all the way reading in a book of
Receipts of making fine meats and sweetmeats, among others to make
my own sweet water, which made us good sport. So I landed them at
Greenwich, and there to a garden, and gave them fruit and wine, and so
to boat again, and finally, in the cool of the evening, to Lyon Kee,

     [Lion Key, Lower Thames Street, where the famous Duchess of Suffolk
     in the time of Bishop Gardiner’s persecution took boat for the
     continent.  James, Duke of York, also left the country from this
     same place on the night of April 20th, 1648, when he escaped from
     St. James’s Palace.]

the tide against us, and so landed and walked to the Bridge, and there
took a coach by chance passing by, and so I saw them home, and there eat
some cold venison with them, and drunk and bade them good night, having
been mighty merry with them, and I think it is not amiss to preserve,
though it cost me a little, such a friend as Mrs. Turner. So home and to
bed, my head running upon what to do to-morrow to fit things against my
wife’s coming, as to buy a bedstead, because my brother John is here,
and I have now no more beds than are used.