24th (Lord’s day). Having taken one of Mr. Holliard’s pills last night
it brought a stool or two this morning, and so forebore going to church
this morning, but staid at home looking over my papers about Tom Trice’s
business, and so at noon dined, and my wife telling me that there was a
pretty lady come to church with Peg Pen to-day, I against my intention
had a mind to go to church to see her, and did so, and she is pretty
handsome. But over against our gallery I espied Pembleton, and saw him
leer upon my wife all the sermon, I taking no notice of him, and my wife
upon him, and I observed she made a curtsey to him at coming out without
taking notice to me at all of it, which with the consideration of her
being desirous these two last Lord’s days to go to church both forenoon
and afternoon do really make me suspect something more than ordinary,
though I am loth to think the worst, but yet it put and do still keep me
at a great loss in my mind, and makes me curse the time that I consented
to her dancing, and more my continuing it a second month, which was more
than she desired, even after I had seen too much of her carriage with
him. But I must have patience and get her into the country, or at least
to make an end of her learning to dance as soon as I can. After sermon
to Sir W. Pen’s, with Sir J. Minnes to do a little business to answer
Mr. Coventry to-night. And so home and with my wife and Ashwell into the
garden walking a great while, discoursing what this pretty wench should
be by her garb and deportment; with respect to Mrs. Pen she may be her
woman, but only that she sat in the pew with her, which I believe he
would not let her do. So home, and read to my wife a fable or two in
Ogleby’s AEsop, and so to supper, and then to prayers and to bed. My
wife this evening discoursing of making clothes for the country, which
I seem against, pleading lack of money, but I am glad of it in some
respects because of getting her out of the way from this fellow, and my
own liberty to look after my business more than of late I have done.
So to prayers and to bed. This morning it seems Susan, who I think is
distracted, or however is since she went from me taught to drink, and so
gets out of doors 2 or 3 times a day without leave to the alehouse, did
go before 5 o’clock to-day, making Griffin rise in his shirt to let her
out to the alehouse, she said to warm herself, but her mistress, falling
out with her about it, turned her out of doors this morning, and so she
is gone like an idle slut. I took a pill also this night.