24th. Up and to my office, where busy all the morning about Mr. Gauden’s
account, and at noon to dinner with him at the Dolphin, where mighty
merry by pleasant stories of Mr. Coventry’s and Sir J. Minnes’s, which
I have put down some of in my book of tales. Just as I was going out my
uncle Thomas came to the with a draught of a bond for him and his sons
to sign to me about the payment of the L20 legacy, which I agreed to,
but he would fain have had from me the copy of the deed, which he had
forged and did bring me yesterday, but I would not give him it. Says
[he] I perceive then you will keep it to defame me with, and desired
me not to speak of it, for he did it innocently. Now I confess I do not
find any great hurt in the thing, but only to keep from me a sight of
the true original deed, wherein perhaps there was something else that
may touch this business of the legacy which he would keep from me, or
it may be, it is really lost as he says it is. But then he need not have
used such a slight, but confess it without danger. Thence by coach with
Mr. Coventry to the Temple, and thence I to the Six Clerks’ office, and
discoursed with my Attorney and Solicitor, and he and I to Mr. Turner,
who puts me in great fear that I shall not get retayned again against
Tom Trice; which troubles me. Thence, it being night, homewards, and
called at Wotton’s and tried some shoes, but he had none to fit me. He
tells me that by the Duke of York’s persuasion Harris is come again to
Sir W. Davenant upon his terms that he demanded, which will make him
very high and proud. Thence to another shop, and there bought me a pair
of shoes, and so walked home and to my office, and dispatch letters by
the post, and so home to supper and to bed, where to my trouble I find
my wife begin to talk of her being alone all day, which is nothing
but her lack of something to do, for while she was busy she never, or
seldom, complained..... The Queen is in a good way of recovery; and Sir
Francis Pridgeon hath got great honour by it, it being all imputed to
his cordiall, which in her dispaire did give her rest and brought her to
some hopes of recovery. It seems that, after the much talk of troubles
and a plot, something is found in the North that a party was to rise,
and some persons that were to command it are found, as I find in a
letter that Mr. Coventry read to-day about it from those parts.

     [This refers to a rising in the West Riding of Yorkshire, which took
     place on October 12th, and was known as the Farneley Wood Plot.  The
     rising was easily put down, and several prisoners were taken.  A
     special commission of oyer and terminer was sent down to York to try
     the prisoners in January, 1663-64, when twenty-one were convicted
     and executed.  (See Whitaker’s “Loidis and Elmete,” 1816.)]