July 1st. This morning it rained so hard (though it was fair yesterday,
and we thereupon in hopes of having some fair weather, which we have
wanted these three months) that it wakened Creed, who lay with me last
night, and me, and so we up and fell to discourse of the business of
his accounts now under dispute, in which I have taken much trouble upon
myself and raised a distance between Sir G. Carteret and myself, which
troubles me, but I hope we have this morning light on an expedient that
will right all, that will answer their queries, and yet save Creed the
L500 which he did propose to make of the exchange abroad of the pieces
of eight which he disbursed. Being ready, he and I by water to White
Hall, where I left him before we came into the Court, for fear I should
be seen by Sir G. Carteret with him, which of late I have been forced
to avoid to remove suspicion. I to St. James’s, and there discoursed
a while with Mr. Coventry, between whom and myself there is very good
understanding and friendship, and so to Westminster Hall, and being
in the Parliament lobby, I there saw my Lord of Bristoll come to the
Commons House to give his answer to their question, about some words he
should tell the King that were spoke by Sir Richard Temple, a member of
their House. A chair was set at the bar of the House for him, which he
used but little, but made an harangue of half an hour bareheaded, the
House covered. His speech being done, he came out and withdrew into a
little room till the House had concluded of an answer to his speech;
which they staying long upon, I went away. And by and by out comes
Sir W. Batten; and he told me that his Lordship had made a long and a
comedian-like speech, and delivered with such action as was not becoming
his Lordship. He confesses he did tell the King such a thing of Sir
Richard Temple, but that upon his honour they were not spoke by Sir
Richard, he having taken a liberty of enlarging to the King upon the
discourse which had been between Sir Richard and himself lately; and so
took upon himself the whole blame, and desired their pardon, it being
not to do any wrong to their fellow-member, but out of zeal to the King.
He told them, among many other things, that as to his religion he was a
Roman Catholique, but such a one as thought no man to have right to the
Crown of England but the Prince that hath it; and such a one as, if the
King should desire his counsel as to his own, he would not advise him to
another religion than the old true reformed religion of this country, it
being the properest of this kingdom as it now stands; and concluded with
a submission to what the House shall do with him, saying, that whatever
they shall do, says he, “thanks be to God, this head, this heart, and
this sword (pointing to them all), will find me a being in any place in
Europe.” The House hath hereupon voted clearly Sir Richard Temple to
be free from the imputation of saying those words; but when Sir William
Batten came out, had not concluded what to say to my Lord, it being
argued that to own any satisfaction as to my Lord from his speech, would
be to lay some fault upon the King for the message he should upon no
better accounts send to the impeaching of one of their members. Walking
out, I hear that the House of Lords are offended that my Lord Digby
should come to this House and make a speech there without leave first
asked of the House of Lords. I hear also of another difficulty now upon
him; that my Lord of Sunderland (whom I do not know) was so near to
the marriage of his daughter as that the wedding-clothes were made, and
portion and every thing agreed on and ready; and the other day he goes
away nobody yet knows whither, sending her the next morning a release of
his right or claim to her, and advice to his friends not to enquire into
the reason of this doing, for he hath enough for it; but that he gives
them liberty to say and think what they will of him, so they do not
demand the reason of his leaving her, being resolved never to have her,
but the reason desires and resolves not to give. Thence by water with
Sir W. Batten to Trinity House, there to dine with him, which we did;
and after dinner we fell talking, Sir J. Minnes, Mr. Batten and I; Mr.
Batten telling us of a late triall of Sir Charles Sydly the other
day, before my Lord Chief Justice Foster and the whole bench, for his
debauchery a little while since at Oxford Kate’s,

     [The details in the original are very gross.  Dr. Johnson relates
     the story in the “Lives of the Poets,” in his life of Sackville,
     Lord Dorset “Sackville, who was then Lord Buckhurst, with Sir
     Charles Sedley and Sir Thomas Ogle, got drunk at the Cock, in Bow
     Street, by Covent Garden, and going into the balcony exposed
     themselves to the populace in very indecent postures.  At last, as
     they grew warmer, Sedley stood forth naked, and harangued the
     populace in such profane language, that the publick indignation was
     awakened; the crowd attempted to force the door, and being repulsed,
     drove in the performers with stones, and broke the windows of the
     house.  For this misdemeanour they were indicted, and Sedley was
     fined five hundred pounds; what was the sentence of the others is
     not known.  Sedley employed [Henry] Killigrew and another to procure
     a remission from the King, but (mark the friendship of the
     dissolute!) they begged the fine for themselves, and exacted it to
     the last groat.”  The woman known as Oxford Kate appears to have
     kept the notorious Cock Tavern in Bow Street at this date.]

coming in open day into the Balcone and showed his nakedness,.... and
abusing of scripture and as it were from thence preaching a mountebank
sermon from the pulpit, saying that there he had to sell such a powder
as should make all the [women] in town run after him, 1000 people
standing underneath to see and hear him, and that being done he took a
glass of wine.... and then drank it off, and then took another and drank
the King’s health. It seems my Lord and the rest of the judges did
all of them round give him a most high reproof; my Lord Chief justice
saying, that it was for him, and such wicked wretches as he was, that
God’s anger and judgments hung over us, calling him sirrah many times.
It’s said they have bound him to his good behaviour (there being no law
against him for it) in L5000. It being told that my Lord Buckhurst was
there, my Lord asked whether it was that Buckhurst that was lately tried
for robbery; and when answered Yes, he asked whether he had so soon
forgot his deliverance at that time, and that it would have more become
him to have been at his prayers begging God’s forgiveness, than now
running into such courses again.... Thence home, and my clerks being
gone by my leave to see the East India ships that are lately come home,
I staid all alone within my office all the afternoon. This day I hear at
dinner that Don John of Austria, since his flight out of Portugall, is
dead of his wounds:--[not true]--so there is a great man gone, and a
great dispute like to be ended for the crown of Spayne, if the King
should have died before him. I received this morning a letter from my
wife, brought by John Gower to town, wherein I find a sad falling out
between my wife and my father and sister and Ashwell upon my writing
to my father to advise Pall not to keep Ashwell from her mistress, or
making any difference between them. Which Pall telling to Ashwell, and
she speaking some words that her mistress heard, caused great difference
among them; all which I am sorry from my heart to hear of, and I fear
will breed ill blood not to be laid again. So that I fear my wife and I
may have some falling out about it, or at least my father and I, but I
shall endeavour to salve up all as well as I can, or send for her out
of the country before the time intended, which I would be loth to do. In
the evening by water to my coz. Roger Pepys’ chamber, where he was not
come, but I found Dr. John newly come to town, and is well again after
his sickness; but, Lord! what a simple man he is as to any public matter
of state, and talks so sillily to his brother Dr. Tom. What the matter
is I know not, but he has taken (as my father told me a good while
since) such displeasure that he hardly would touch his hat to me, and
I as little to him. By and by comes Roger, and he told us the whole
passage of my Lord Digby to-day, much as I have said here above; only
that he did say that he would draw his sword against the Pope himself,
if he should offer any thing against his Majesty, and the good of
these nations; and that he never was the man that did either look for a
Cardinal’s cap for himself, or any body else, meaning Abbot Montagu; and
the House upon the whole did vote Sir Richard Temple innocent; and that
my Lord Digby hath cleared the honour of his Majesty, and Sir Richard
Temple’s, and given perfect satisfaction of his own respects to the
House. Thence to my brother’s, and being vexed with his not minding my
father’s business here in getting his Landscape done, I went away in an
anger, and walked home, and so up to my lute and then to bed.