6th (Twelfth Day). Up and Mr. Creed brought a pot of chocolate ready
made for our morning draft, and then he and I to the Duke’s, but I was
not very willing to be seen at this end of the town, and so returned to
our lodgings, and took my wife by coach to my brother’s, where I set her
down, and Creed and I to St. Paul’s Church-yard, to my bookseller’s, and
looked over several books with good discourse, and then into St. Paul’s
Church, and there finding Elborough, my old schoolfellow at Paul’s, now
a parson, whom I know to be a silly fellow, I took him out and walked
with him, making Creed and myself sport with talking with him, and so
sent him away, and we to my office and house to see all well, and
thence to the Exchange, where we met with Major Thomson, formerly of our
office, who do talk very highly of liberty of conscience, which now he
hopes for by the King’s declaration, and that he doubts not that if he
will give him, he will find more and better friends than the Bishopps
can be to him, and that if he do not, there will many thousands in a
little time go out of England, where they may have it. But he says that
they are well contented that if the King thinks it good, the Papists may
have the same liberty with them. He tells me, and so do others, that Dr.
Calamy is this day sent to Newgate for preaching, Sunday was se’nnight,
without leave, though he did it only to supply the place; when otherwise
the people must have gone away without ever a sermon, they being
disappointed of a minister but the Bishop of London will not take that
as an excuse. Thence into Wood Street, and there bought a fine table for
my dining-room, cost me 50s.; and while we were buying it, there was a
scare-fire

     [Scar-fire or scarefire.  An alarm of fire.  One of the little
     pieces in Herrick’s “Hesperides” is entitled “The Scar-fire,” but
     the word sometimes was used, as in the text, for the fire itself.
     Fuller, in his “Worthies,” speaks of quenching scare-fires.]

in an ally over against us, but they quenched it. So to my brother’s,
where Creed and I and my wife dined with Tom, and after dinner to the
Duke’s house, and there saw “Twelfth Night”

     [Pepys saw “Twelfth Night” for the first time on September 11th,