26th. Waked about one o’clock in the morning.... My wife being waked
rung her bell, and the mayds rose and went to washing, we to sleep again
till 7 o’clock, and then up, and I abroad to look out Dr. Williams,
but being gone out I went to Westminster, and there seeing my Lord
Sandwich’s footman knew he was come to town, and so I went in and saw
him, and received a kind salute from him, but hear that my father is
very ill still. Thence to Westminster Hall with Creed, and spent
the morning walking there, where, it being Terme time, I met several
persons, and talked with them, among others Dr. Pierce, who tells
me that the Queen is in a way to be pretty well again, but that her
delirium in her head continues still; that she talks idle, not by fits,
but always, which in some lasts a week after so high a fever, in some
more, and in some for ever; that this morning she talked mightily
that she was brought to bed, and that she wondered that she should be
delivered without pain and without spueing or being sicke, and that she
was troubled that her boy was but an ugly boy. But the King being by,
said, “No, it is a very pretty boy.”--“Nay,” says she, “if it be like
you it is a fine boy indeed, and I would be very well pleased with it.”
 The other day she talked mightily of Sir H. Wood’s lady’s great belly,
and said if she should miscarry he would never get another, and that she
never saw such a man as this Sir H. Wood in her life, and seeing of Dr.
Pridgeon, she said, “Nay, Doctor, you need not scratch your head, there
is hair little enough already in the place.” But methinks it was not
handsome for the weaknesses of Princes to be talked of thus. Thence
Creed and I to the King’s Head ordinary, where much and very good
company, among others one very talking man, but a scholler, that would
needs put in his discourse and philosophy upon every occasion, and
though he did well enough, yet his readiness to speak spoilt all. Here
they say that the Turkes go on apace, and that my Lord Castlehaven is
going to raise 10,000 men here for to go against him; that the King of
France do offer to assist the Empire upon condition that he may be their
Generalissimo, and the Dolphin chosen King of the Romans: and it is said
that the King of France do occasion this difference among the Christian
Princes of the Empire, which gives the Turke such advantages. They say
also that the King of Spayne is making all imaginable force against
Portugall again. Thence Creed and I to one or two periwigg shops about
the Temple, having been very much displeased with one that we saw, a
head of greasy and old woman’s haire, at Jervas’s in the morning; and
there I think I shall fit myself of one very handsomely made. Thence by
coach, my mind being troubled for not meeting with Dr. Williams, to St.
Catharine’s to look at a Dutch ship or two for some good handsome maps,
but met none, and so back to Cornhill to Moxon’s, but it being dark we
staid not to see any, then to coach again, and presently spying Sir W.
Batten; I ‘light and took him in and to the Globe in Fleete Streete,
by appointment, where by and by he and I with our solicitor to Sir F.
Turner about Field’s business, and back to the Globe, and thither I sent
for Dr. Williams, and he is willing to swear in my behalf against T.
Trice, viz., that at T. Trice’s desire we have met to treat about our
business. Thence (I drinking no wine) after an hour’s stay Sir W. Batten
and another, and he drinking, we home by coach, and so to my office and
set down my Journall, and then home to supper and to bed, my washing
being in a good condition over. I did give Dr. Williams 20s. tonight,
but it was after he had answered me well to what I had to ask him about
this business, and it was only what I had long ago in my petty bag book
allotted for him besides the bill of near L4 which I paid him a good
while since by my brother Tom for physique for my wife, without any
consideration to this business that he is to do for me, as God shall
save me. Among the rest, talking of the Emperor at table to-day one
young gentleman, a pretty man, and it seems a Parliament man, did say
that he was a sot;

     [Leopold I, the Holy Roman Emperor, was born June 9th, 1640.  He
     became King of Hungary in 1655, and King of Bohemia in 1658, in
     which year he received the imperial crown.  The Princes of the
     German Empire watched for some time the progress of his struggle
     with the Turks with indifference, but in 1663 they were induced to
     grant aid to Leopold after he had made a personal appeal to them in
     the diet at Ratisbon.]

for he minded nothing of the Government, but was led by the Jesuites.
Several at table took him up, some for saying that he was a sot in being
led by the Jesuites, [who] are the best counsel he can take. Another
commander, a Scott[ish] Collonell, who I believe had several under him,
that he was a man that had thus long kept out the Turke till now,
and did many other great things, and lastly Mr. Progers, one of our
courtiers, who told him that it was not a thing to be said of any
Soveraigne Prince, be his weaknesses what they will, to be called a sot,
which methinks was very prettily said.