18th. Up, and after being ready, and done a little business at the
office, I and Mr. Hater by water to Redriffe, and so walked to Deptford,
where I have not been a very great, while, and there paid off the
Milford in very good order, and all respect showed me in the office as
much as there used to be to any of the rest or the whole board. That
done at noon I took Captain Terne, and there coming in by chance Captain
Berkeley, him also to dinner with me to the Globe. Captain Berkeley, who
was lately come from Algier, did give us a good account of the place,
and how the Basha there do live like a prisoner, being at the mercy
of the soldiers and officers, so that there is nothing but a great
confusion there. After dinner came Sir W. Batten, and I left him to pay
off another ship, and I walked home again reading of a little book
of new poems of Cowley’s, given me by his brother. Abraham do lie, it
seems, very sicke, still, but like to recover. At my office till late,
and then came Mr. Hollyard so full of discourse and Latin that I think
he hath got a cupp, but I do not know; but full of talke he is in
defence of Calvin and Luther. He begun this night the fomentation to
my wife, and I hope it will do well with her. He gone, I to the office
again a little, and so to bed. This morning I sent Will with my great
letter of reproof to my Lord Sandwich, who did give it into his owne
hand. I pray God give a blessing to it, but confess I am afeard what
the consequence may be to me of good or bad, which is according to the
ingenuity that he do receive it with. However, I am satisfied that it
will do him good, and that he needs it:

     MY LORD,

     I do verily hope that neither the manner nor matter of this advice
     will be condemned by your Lordship, when for my defence in the first
     I shall alledge my double attempt, since your return from
     Hinchinbroke, of doing it personally, in both of which your
     Lordship’s occasions, no doubtfulnesse of mine, prevented me, and
     that being now fearful of a sudden summons to Portsmouth, for the
     discharge of some ships there, I judge it very unbecoming the duty
     which every bit of bread I eat tells me I owe to your Lordship to
     expose the safety of your honour to the uncertainty of my return.
     For the matter, my Lord, it is such as could I in any measure think
     safe to conceal from, or likely to be discovered to you by any other
     hand, I should not have dared so far to owne what from my heart I
     believe is false, as to make myself but the relater of other’s
     discourse; but, sir, your Lordship’s honour being such as I ought to
     value it to be, and finding both in city and court that discourses
     pass to your prejudice, too generally for mine or any man’s
     controllings but your Lordship’s, I shall, my Lord, without the
     least greatening or lessening the matter, do my duty in laying it
     shortly before you.

     People of all conditions, my Lord, raise matter of wonder from your
     Lordship’s so little appearance at Court: some concluding thence
     their disfavour thereby, to which purpose I have had questions asked
     me, and endeavouring to put off such insinuations by asserting the
     contrary, they have replied, that your Lordship’s living so beneath
     your quality, out of the way, and declining of Court attendance,
     hath been more than once discoursed about the King.  Others, my
     Lord, when the chief ministers of State, and those most active of
     the Council have been reckoned up, wherein your Lordship never used
     to want an eminent place, have said, touching your Lordship, that
     now your turn was served, and the King had given you a good estate,
     you left him to stand or fall as he would, and, particularly in that
     of the Navy, have enlarged upon your letting fall all service there.

     Another sort, and those the most, insist upon the bad report of the
     house wherein your Lordship, now observed in perfect health again,
     continues to sojourne, and by name have charged one of the daughters
     for a common courtizan, alledging both places and persons where and
     with whom she hath been too well known, and how much her wantonnesse
     occasions, though unjustly, scandal to your Lordship, and that as
     well to gratifying of some enemies as to the wounding of more
     friends I am not able to tell.

     Lastly, my Lord, I find a general coldness in all persons towards
     your Lordship, such as, from my first dependance on you, I never yet
     knew, wherein I shall not offer to interpose any thoughts or advice
     of mine, well knowing your Lordship needs not any.  But with a most
     faithful assurance that no person nor papers under Heaven is privy
     to what I here write, besides myself and this, which I shall be
     careful to have put into your owne hands, I rest confident of your
     Lordship’s just construction of my dutifull intents herein, and in
     all humility take leave, may it please your Lordship,

     Your Lordship’s most obedient Servant, S. P.

The foregoing letter was sealed up, and enclosed in this that follows

     MY LORD,

     If this finds your Lordship either not alone, or not at leisure, I
     beg the suspending your opening of the enclosed till you shall have
     both, the matter very well bearing such a delay, and in all humility
     remain, may it please your Lordship,

     Your Lordship’s most obedient Servant, S. P.