16th. Up betimes, and with my wife to Hinchingbroke to see my Lady, she
being to go to my Lord this morning, and there I left her, and so back
to the Court, and heard Sir R. Bernard’s charges to the Courts Baron
and Leete, which took up till noon, and were worth hearing, and after
putting my business into some way, went home to my father’s to dinner,
and after dinner to the Court, where Sir Robert and his son came again
by and by, and then to our business, and my father and I having given
bond to him for the L21 Piggott owed him, my uncle Thomas did quietly
admit himself and surrender to us the lands first mortgaged for our
whole debt, and Sir Robert added to it what makes it up L209, to be paid
in six months. But when I came to give him an account of more lands
to be surrendered to us, wherein Piggott’s wife was concerned, and she
there to give her consent, Sir Robert would not hear of it, but began
to talk very high that we were very cruel, and we had caution enough
for our money, and he could not in conscience let the woman do it, and
reproached my uncle, both he and his son, with taking use upon use for
this money. To all which I did give him such answers and spoke so well,
and kept him so to it, that all the Court was silent to hear us, and by
report since do confess they did never hear the like in the place. But
he by a wile had got our bond, and I was content to have as much as I
could though I could not get all, and so took Piggott’s surrender of
them without his wife, and by Sir Robert’s own consent did tell the
Court that if the money were not paid in the time, and the security
prove not sufficient, I would conclude myself wronged by Sir Robert,
which he granted I should do. This kept us till night, but am heartily
glad it ended so well on my uncle’s part, he doing that and Prior’s
little house very willingly. So the Court broke up, and my father and
Mr. Shepley and I to Gorrum’s to drink, and then I left them, and to
the Bull, where my uncle was to hear what he and the people said of our
business, and here nothing but what liked me very well. So by and by
home and to supper, and with my mind in pretty good quiett, to bed.