5th. Up and to the Duke, who himself told me that Sir J. Lawson was come
home to Portsmouth from the Streights, who is now come with great renown
among all men, and, I perceive, mightily esteemed at Court by all.
The Duke did not stay long in his chamber; but to the King’s chamber,
whither by and by the Russia Embassadors come; who, it seems, have a
custom that they will not come to have any treaty with our or any King’s
Commissioners, but they will themselves see at the time the face of the
King himself, be it forty days one after another; and so they did to-day
only go in and see the King; and so out again to the Council-chamber.
The Duke returned to his chamber, and so to his closett, where Sir
G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, Mr. Coventry, and myself
attended him about the business of the Navy; and after much discourse
and pleasant talk he went away. And I took Sir W. Batten and Captain
Allen into the wine cellar to my tenant (as I call him, Serjeant
Dalton), and there drank a great deal of variety of wines, more than
I have drunk at one time, or shall again a great while, when I come to
return to my oaths, which I intend in a day or two. Thence to my Lord’s
lodging, where Mr. Hunt and Mr. Creed dined with us, and were very
merry. And after dinner he and I to White Hall, where the Duke and the
Commissioners for Tangier met, but did not do much: my Lord Sandwich not
being in town, nobody making it their business. So up, and Creed and
I to my wife again, and after a game or two at cards, to the Cockpitt,
where we saw “Claracilla,” a poor play, done by the King’s house (but
neither the King nor Queen were there, but only the Duke and Duchess,
who did show some impertinent and, methought, unnatural dalliances
there, before the whole world, such as kissing, and leaning upon one
another); but to my very little content, they not acting in any degree
like the Duke’s people. So home (there being here this night Mrs. Turner
and Mrs. Martha Batten of our office) to my Lord’s lodgings again, and
to a game at cards, we three and Sarah, and so to supper and some apples
and ale, and to bed with great pleasure, blessed be God!