30th. Was called up by a messenger from Sir W. Pen to go with him by
coach to White Hall. So I got up and went with him, and by the way he
began to observe to me some unkind dealing of mine to him a weeke or two
since at the table, like a coxcomb, when I answered him pretty freely
that I would not think myself to owe any man the service to do this or
that because they would have it so (it was about taking of a mulct
upon a purser for not keeping guard at Chatham when I was there), so
he talked and I talked and let fall the discourse without giving or
receiving any great satisfaction, and so to other discourse, but I shall
know him still for a false knave. At White Hall we met the Duke in the
Matted Gallery, and there he discoursed with us; and by and by my Lord
Sandwich came and stood by, and talked; but it being St. Andrew’s, and a
collar-day, he went to the Chappell, and we parted. From him and Sir W.
Pen and I back again and ‘light at the ‘Change, and to the Coffee-house,
where I heard the best story of a cheate intended by a Master of a ship,
who had borrowed twice his money upon the bottomary, and as much more
insured upon his ship and goods as they were worth, and then would have
cast her away upon the coast of France, and there left her, refusing any
pilott which was offered him; and so the Governor of the place took her
and sent her over hither to find an owner, and so the ship is come safe,
and goods and all; they all worth L500, and he had one way or other
taken L3000. The cause is to be tried to-morrow at Guildhall, where
I intend to be. Thence home to dinner, and then with my wife to her
arithmetique. In the evening came W. Howe to see me, who tells me that
my Lord hath been angry three or four days with him, would not speak to
him; at last did, and charged him with having spoken to me about what he
had observed concerning his Lordship, which W. Howe denying stoutly, he
was well at ease; and continues very quiett, and is removing from
Chelsy as fast as he can, but, methinks, both by my Lord’s looks upon
me to-day, or it may be it is only my doubtfulness, and by W. Howe’s
discourse, my Lord is not very well pleased, nor, it may be, will be a
good while, which vexes me; but I hope all will over in time, or else I
am but ill rewarded for my good service. Anon he and I to the Temple
and there parted, and I to my cozen Roger Pepys, whom I met going to his
chamber; he was in haste, and to go out of town tomorrow. He tells me of
a letter from my father which he will keep to read to me at his coming
to town again. I perceive it is about my father’s jealousys concerning
my wife’s doing ill offices with me against him only from the
differences they had when she was there, which he very unwisely
continues to have and troubles himself and friends about to speak to me
in, as my Lord Sandwich, Mr. Moore, and my cozen Roger, which vexes me,
but I must impute it to his age and care for my mother and Pall and
so let it go. After little discourse with him I took coach and home,
calling upon my bookseller’s for two books, Rushworth’s and Scobell’s
Collections. I shall make the King pay for them. The first I spent some
time at the office to read and it is an excellent book. So home and
spent the evening with my wife in arithmetique, and so to supper and to
bed. I end this month with my mind in good condition for any thing else,
but my unhappy adventuring to disoblige my Lord by doing him service in
representing to him the discourse of the world concerning him and his
affairs.