29th. Up, it being my Lord Mayor’s day, Sir Anthony Bateman. This
morning was brought home my new velvet cloake, that is, lined with
velvet, a good cloth the outside, the first that ever I had in my life,
and I pray God it may not be too soon now that I begin to wear it. I had
it this day brought, thinking to have worn it to dinner, but I thought
it would be better to go without it because of the crowde, and so I did
not wear it. We met a little at the office, and then home again and got
me ready to go forth, my wife being gone forth by my consent before to
see her father and mother, and taken her cooke mayde and little girle
to Westminster with her for them to see their friends. This morning in
dressing myself and wanting a band,

     [The band succeeded the ruff as the ordinary civil costume.  The
     lawyers, who now retain bands, and the clergy, who have only lately
     left them off, formerly wore ruffs.]

I found all my bands that were newly made clean so ill smoothed that
I crumpled them, and flung them all on the ground, and was angry with
Jane, which made the poor girle mighty sad, so that I were troubled for
it afterwards. At noon I went forth, and by coach to Guild Hall (by the
way calling at Mr. Rawlinson’s), and there was admitted, and meeting
with Mr. Proby (Sir R. Ford’s son), and Lieutenant-Colonel Baron, a City
commander, we went up and down to see the tables; where under every salt
there was a bill of fare, and at the end of the table the persons
proper for the table. Many were the tables, but none in the Hall but the
Mayor’s and the Lords of the Privy Council that had napkins

     [As the practice of eating with forks gradually was introduced from
     Italy into England, napkins were not so generally used, but
     considered more as an ornament than a necessary.

                    “The laudable use of forks,
          Brought into custom here, as they are in Italy,
          To the sparing of napkins.”

                         Ben Jonson, The Devil is an Ass, act v., sc.  3.

     The guests probably brought their own knife and fork with them in a
     case.--M.B.]

or knives, which was very strange. We went into the Buttry, and there
stayed and talked, and then into the Hall again: and there wine was
offered and they drunk, I only drinking some hypocras, which do not
break my vowe, it being, to the best of my present judgement, only a
mixed compound drink, and not any wine.

     [A drink, composed usually of red wine, but sometimes of white, with
     the addition of sugar and spices.  Sir Walter Scott (“Quarterly
     Review,” vol.  xxxiii.) says, after quoting this passage of Pepys,
     “Assuredly his pieces of bacchanalian casuistry can only be matched
     by that of Fielding’s chaplain of Newgate, who preferred punch to
     wine, because the former was a liquor nowhere spoken against in
     Scripture.”]

If I am mistaken, God forgive me! but I hope and do think I am not. By
and by met with Creed; and we, with the others, went within the several
Courts, and there saw the tables prepared for the Ladies and Judges and
Bishopps: all great sign of a great dinner to come. By and by about one
o’clock, before the Lord Mayor came, come into the Hall, from the room
where they were first led into, the Lord Chancellor (Archbishopp before
him), with the Lords of the Council, and other Bishopps, and they to
dinner. Anon comes the Lord Mayor, who went up to the lords, and then
to the other tables to bid wellcome; and so all to dinner. I sat near
Proby, Baron, and Creed at the Merchant Strangers’ table; where ten good
dishes to a messe, with plenty of wine of all sorts, of which I drunk
none; but it was very unpleasing that we had no napkins nor change of
trenchers, and drunk out of earthen pitchers and wooden dishes.--[The
City plate was probably melted during the Civil War.-M.B.]--It happened
that after the lords had half dined, came the French Embassador, up to
the lords’ table, where he was to have sat; but finding the table set,
he would not sit down nor dine with the Lord Mayor, who was not
yet come, nor have a table to himself, which was offered; but in a
discontent went away again. After I had dined, I and Creed rose and
went up and down the house, and up to the lady’s room, and there stayed
gazing upon them. But though there were many and fine, both young and
old, yet I could not discern one handsome face there; which was very
strange, nor did I find the lady that young Dawes married so pretty as I
took her for, I having here an opportunity of looking much upon her
very near. I expected musique, but there was none but only trumpets and
drums, which displeased me. The dinner, it seems, is made by the Mayor
and two Sheriffs for the time being, the Lord Mayor paying one half, and
they the other. And the whole, Proby says, is reckoned to come to about