6th. Up and to my office about business, examining people what they
could swear against Field, and the whole is, that he has called us
cheating rogues and cheating knaves, for which we hope to be even with
him. Thence to Lincoln’s Inn Fields; and it being too soon to go to
dinner, I walked up and down, and looked upon the outside of the new
theatre, now a-building in Covent Garden, which will be very fine. And
so to a bookseller’s in the Strand, and there bought Hudibras again,
it being certainly some ill humour to be so against that which all the
world cries up to be the example of wit; for which I am resolved once
again to read him, and see whether I can find it or no. So to Mr.
Povy’s, and there found them at dinner, and dined there, there being,
among others, Mr. Williamson, Latin Secretary, who, I perceive, is a
pretty knowing man and a scholler, but, it may be, thinks himself to
be too much so. Thence, after dinner, to the Temple, to my cozen Roger
Pepys, where met us my uncle Thomas and his son; and, after many high
demands, we at last came to a kind of agreement upon very hard terms,
which are to be prepared in writing against Tuesday next. But by the
way promising them to pay my cozen Mary’s’ legacys at the time of her
marriage, they afterwards told me that she was already married, and
married very well, so that I must be forced to pay it in some time. My
cozen Roger was so sensible of our coming to agreement that he could not
forbear weeping, and, indeed, though it is very hard, yet I am glad to
my heart that we are like to end our trouble. So we parted for to-night,
and I to my Lord Sandwich and there staid, there being a Committee to
sit upon the contract for the Mole, which I dare say none of us that
were there understood, but yet they agreed of things as Mr. Cholmely and
Sir J. Lawson demanded, who are the undertakers, and so I left them to
go on to agree, for I understood it not. So home, and being called by a
coachman who had a fare in him, he carried me beyond the Old Exchange,
and there set down his fare, who would not pay him what was his due,
because he carried a stranger with him, and so after wrangling he was
fain to be content with 6d., and being vexed the coachman would not
carry me home a great while, but set me down there for the other 6d.,
but with fair words he was willing to it, and so I came home and to my
office, setting business in order, and so to supper and to bed, my mind
being in disorder as to the greatness of this day’s business that I have
done, but yet glad that my trouble therein is like to be over.