3rd of September, and although a Committee of the Mint reported in
     favour of his method of coining, the Company of Moneyers, who appear
     to have boasted of the success of their predecessors in opposing the
     introduction of the mill and screw-press in Queen Elizabeth’s reign,
     prevented the introduction of the machinery, and consequently he did
     not produce pattern pieces until 1653....  It is certain that
     Blondeau did not invent, but only improved the method of coining by
     the screw-press, and I believe his improvements related chiefly to a
     method for ‘rounding the pieces before they are sized, and in making
     the edges of the moneys with letters and graining,’ which he
     undertook to reveal to the king.  Special stress is laid on the
     engines wherewith the rims were marked, ‘which might be kept secret
     among few men.’  I cannot find that there is any record in the Paris
     mint of Blondeau’s employment there, and the only reference to his
     invention in the Mint records of this country refers to the
     ‘collars,’ or perforated discs of metal surrounding the ‘blank’
     while it was struck into a coin.  There is, however, in the British
     Museum a MS. believed to be in Blondeau’s hand, in which he claims
     his process, ‘as a new invention, to make a handsome coyne, than can
     be found in all the world besides, viz., that shall not only be
     stamped on both flat sides, but shall even be marked with letters on
     the thickness of the brim.’  The letters were raised.  The press
     Blondeau used was, I believe, the ordinary screw-press, and I
     suppose that the presses drawn in Akerman’s well-known plate of the
     coining-room of the Mint in the Tower, published in 1803 [‘Microcosm
     of London,’ vol.  ii., p. 202], if not actually the same machines,
     were similar to those erected in 1661-62 by Sir William Parkhurst
     and Sir Anthony St. Leger, wardens of the Mint, at a cost of L1400,
     Professor Roberts-Austen shows that Benvenuto Cellini used a similar
     press to that attributed to Blondeau, and he gives an illustration
     of this in his lecture (p. 810).  In a letter to the editor the
     professor writes: “Pepys’s account of the operations of coining, and
     especially of assaying gold and silver, is very interesting and
     singularly accurate considering that he could not have had technical
     knowledge of the subject.”]