13th. So, it being high day, I put in to shore and to bed for two
hours just, and so up again, and with the Storekeeper and Clerk of the
Rope-yard up and down the Dock and Rope-house, and by and by mustered
the Yard, and instructed the Clerks of the Cheque in my new way of
Callbook, and that and other things done, to the Hill-house, and there
we eat something, and so by barge to Rochester, and there took coach
hired for our passage to London, and Mrs. Allen, the clerk of the
Rope-yard’s wife with us, desiring her passage, and it being a most
pleasant and warm day, we got by four o’clock home. In our way she
telling us in what condition Becky Allen is married against all
expectation a fellow that proves to be a coxcomb and worth little if
any thing at all, and yet are entered into a way of living above their
condition that will ruin them presently, for which, for the lady’s sake,
I am much troubled. Home I found all well there, and after dressing
myself, I walked to the Temple; and there, from my cozen Roger, hear
that the judges have this day brought in their answer to the Lords, That
the articles against my Lord Chancellor are not Treason; and to-morrow
they are to bring in their arguments to the House for the same. This day
also the King did send by my Lord Chamberlain to the Lords, to tell them
from him, that the most of the articles against my Lord Chancellor he
himself knows to be false. Thence by water to Whitehall, and so walked
to St. James’s, but missed Mr. Coventry. I met the Queen-Mother walking
in the Pell Mell, led by my Lord St. Alban’s. And finding many coaches
at the Gate, I found upon enquiry that the Duchess is brought to bed
of a boy; and hearing that the King and Queen are rode abroad with
the Ladies of Honour to the Park, and seeing a great crowd of gallants
staying here to see their return, I also staid walking up and down,
and among others spying a man like Mr. Pembleton (though I have little
reason to think it should be he, speaking and discoursing long with my
Lord D’Aubigne), yet how my blood did rise in my face, and I fell into a
sweat from my old jealousy and hate, which I pray God remove from me.
By and by the King and Queen, who looked in this dress (a white laced
waistcoat and a crimson short pettycoat, and her hair dressed ci la
negligence) mighty pretty; and the King rode hand in hand with her. Here
was also my Lady Castlemaine rode among the rest of the ladies; but the
King took, methought, no notice of her; nor when they ‘light did any
body press (as she seemed to expect, and staid for it) to take her
down, but was taken down by her own gentleman. She looked mighty out of
humour, and had a yellow plume in her hat (which all took notice of),
and yet is very handsome, but very melancholy: nor did any body speak
to her, or she so much as smile or speak to any body. I followed them
up into White Hall, and into the Queen’s presence, where all the ladies
walked, talking and fiddling with their hats and feathers, and changing
and trying one another’s by one another’s heads, and laughing. But it
was the finest sight to me, considering their great beautys and dress,
that ever I did see in all my life. But, above all, Mrs. Stewart in this
dress, with her hat cocked and a red plume, with her sweet eye, little
Roman nose, and excellent taille, is now the greatest beauty I ever
saw, I think, in my life; and, if ever woman can, do exceed my Lady
Castlemaine, at least in this dress nor do I wonder if the King
changes, which I verily believe is the reason of his coldness to my Lady
Castlemaine. Here late, with much ado I left to look upon them, and went
away, and by water, in a boat with other strange company, there being no
other to be had, and out of him into a sculler half to the bridge,
and so home and to Sir W. Batten, where I staid telling him and Sir J.
Minnes and Mrs. Turner, with great mirth, my being frighted at Chatham
by young Edgeborough, and so home to supper and to bed, before I sleep
fancying myself to sport with Mrs. Stewart with great pleasure.