21st. Up, and by and by comes my brother Tom to me, though late (which
do vex me to the blood that I could never get him to come time enough
to me, though I have spoke a hundred times; but he is very sluggish, and
too negligent ever to do well at his trade I doubt), and having lately
considered with my wife very much of the inconvenience of my going in
no better plight, we did resolve of putting me into a better garb, and,
among other things, to have a good velvet cloake; that is, of cloth
lined with velvet and other things modish, and a perruque, and so I
sent him and her out to buy me velvet, and I to the Exchange, and so to
Trinity House, and there dined with Sir W. Batten, having some business
to speak with him, and Sir W. Rider. Thence, having my belly full, away
on foot to my brother’s, all along Thames Streete, and my belly being
full of small beer, I did all alone, for health’s sake, drink half
a pint of Rhenish wine at the Still-yard, mixed with beer. From my
brother’s with my wife to the Exchange, to buy things for her and
myself, I being in a humour of laying out money, but not prodigally, but
only in clothes, which I every day see that I suffer for want of, I
so home, and after a little at my office, home to supper and to bed.
Memorandum: This morning one Mr. Commander, a scrivener, came to me from
Mr. Moore with a deed of which. Mr. Moore had told me, that my Lord
had made use of my name, and that I was desired by my Lord to sign
it. Remembering this very well, though understanding little of the
particulars, I read it over, and found it concern Sir Robt. Bernard and
Duckinford, their interest in the manor of Brampton. So I did sign it,
declaring to Mr. Commander that I am only concerned in having my name
at my Lord Sandwich’s desire used therein, and so I sealed it up after I
had signed and sealed the deed, and desired him to give it so sealed to
Mr. Moore. I did also call at the Wardrobe this afternoon to have told
Mr. Moore of it, but he was not within, but knowing Mr. Commander to
have the esteem of a good and honest man with my Lord Crew, I did not
doubt to intrust him with the deed after I had signed it. This evening
after I came home I begun to enter my wife in arithmetique, in order
to her studying of the globes, and she takes it very well, and, I hope,
with great pleasure, I shall bring her to understand many fine things.