19th. Up betimes, and my wife up and about the house, Susan beginning to
have her drunken tricks, and put us in mind of her old faults and folly
and distractednesse, which we had forgot, so that I became mightily
troubled with her. This morning came my joyners to new lay the floors,
and begun with the dining room. I out and see my viall again, and it is
very well, and to Mr. Hollyard, and took some pills of him and a note
under his hand to drink wine with my beere, without which I was obliged,
by my private vowe, to drink none a good while, and have strictly
observed it, and by my drinking of small beere and not eating, I am so
mightily troubled with wind, that I know not what to do almost. Thence
to White Hall, and there met Mr. Moore, and fell a-talking about my
Lord’s folly at Chelsey, and it was our discourse by water to London
and to the great coffee house against the Exchange, where we sat a good
while talking; and I find that my lord is wholly given up to this
wench, who it seems has been reputed a common strumpett. I have little
encouragement from Mr. Moore to meddle with it to tell my Lord, for fear
it may do him no good, but me hurt. Thence homewards, taking leave of
him, and met Tom Marsh, my old acquaintance at Westminster, who talks
mightily of the honour of his place, being Clerke Assistant to the
Clerke of the House of Commons, and I take him to be a coxcombe, and so
did give him half a pint of wine, but drink none myself, and so got shut
of him. So home, and there found my wife almost mad with Susan’s tricks,
so as she is forced to let her go and leave the house all in dirt and
the clothes all wet, and gets Goody Taylour to do the business for
her till another comes. Here came Will Howe, and he and I alone in my
chamber talking of my Lord, who drives me out of love to my Lord to tell
my Lord of the matter we discoursed of, which tend so much to the ruin
of his state, and so I resolved to take a good heart and do whatever
comes of it. He gone, we sat down and eat a bit of dinner fetched from
the cooke’s, and so up again and to my joyners, who will make my floors
very handsome. By and by comes in Pembleton, which begun to make me
sweat, but I did give him so little countenance, and declared at one
word against dancing any more, and bid him a short (God be with you)
myself, and so he took as short a leave of my wife and so went away,
and I think without any time of receiving any great satisfaction from
my wife or invitation to come again. To my office till it was dark doing
business, and so home by candle light to make up my accounts for my Lord
and Mr. Moore. By and by comes Mr. Moore to me, and staid a good while
with me making up his accounts and mine, and we did not come to any end
therein for want of his papers, and so put it off to another time. He
supped with me in all my dirt and disorder, and so went away and we to
bed. I discoursed with him a great while about my speaking to my Lord
of his business, and I apprehend from him that it is likely to prove
perhaps of bad effect to me and no good to him, and therefore I shall
even let it alone and let God do his will, at least till my Lord is
in the country, and then we shall see whether he resolves to come to
Chelsey again or no, and so order the stopping of him therein if we can.