3 or 4,000 taken prisoners, with all the artillery, baggage, money, &c.,
and Don John of Austria

     [He was natural son of Philip IV., King of Spain, who, after his
     father’s death in 1665, exerted his whole influence to overthrow the
     Regency appointed during the young king’s minority.--B.]

forced to flee with a man or two with him, which is very great news.
Thence home and at my office all the morning, and then by water to St.
James’s, but no meeting to-day being holy day, but met Mr. Creed in the
Park, and after a walk or two, discoursing his business, took leave of
him in Westminster Hall, whither we walked, and then came again to the
Hall and fell to talk with Mrs. Lane, and after great talk that she
never went abroad with any man as she used heretofore to do, I with
one word got her to go with me and to meet me at the further Rhenish
wine-house, where I did give her a Lobster and do so touse her and feel
her all over, making her believe how fair and good a skin she has, and
indeed she has a very white thigh and leg, but monstrous fat. When weary
I did give over and somebody, having seen some of our dalliance, called
aloud in the street, “Sir! why do you kiss the gentlewoman so?” and
flung a stone at the window, which vexed me, but I believe they could
not see my touzing her, and so we broke up and I went out the back way,
without being observed I think, and so she towards the Hall and I to
White Hall, where taking water I to the Temple with my cozen Roger and
Mr. Goldsborough to Gray’s Inn to his counsel, one Mr. Rawworth, a very
fine man, where it being the question whether I as executor should give
a warrant to Goldsborough in my reconveying her estate back again, the
mortgage being performed against all acts of the testator, but only my
own, my cozen said he never heard it asked before; and the other that it
was always asked, and he never heard it denied, or scrupled before,
so great a distance was there in their opinions, enough to make a man
forswear ever having to do with the law; so they agreed to refer it to
Serjeant Maynard. So we broke up, and I by water home from the Temple,
and there to Sir W. Batten and eat with him, he and his lady and Sir J.
Minnes having been below to-day upon the East India men that are come
in, but never tell me so, but that they have been at Woolwich and
Deptford, and done great deal of business. God help them. So home and
up to my lute long, and then, after a little Latin chapter with Will, to
bed. But I have used of late, since my wife went, to make a bad use of
my fancy with whatever woman I have a mind to, which I am ashamed of,
and shall endeavour to do so no more. So to sleep.