13th. And so rose in the morning in perfect good ease.... continued
all the morning well, and in the afternoon had a natural easily and dry
stoole, the first I have had these five days or six, for which God be
praised, and so am likely to continue well, observing for the time to
come when any of this pain comes again

(1) To begin to keep myself as warm as I can.

(2) Strain as little as ever I can backwards, remembering that my pain
will come by and by, though in the very straining I do not feel it.

(3) Either by physic forward or by clyster backward or both ways to get
an easy and plentiful going to stool and breaking of wind.

(4) To begin to suspect my health immediately when I begin to become
costive and bound, and by all means to keep my body loose, and that to
obtain presently after I find myself going the contrary.

This morning at the office, and at noon with Creed to the Exchange,
where much business, but, Lord! how my heart, though I know not reason
for it, began to doubt myself, after I saw Stint, Field’s one-eyed
solicitor, though I know not any thing that they are doing, or that they
endeavour any thing further against us in the business till the terme.
Home, and Creed with me to dinner, and after dinner John Cole, my
old friend, came to see and speak with me about a friend. I find him
ingenious, but more and more discern his city pedantry; but however, I
will endeavour to have his company now and then, for that he knows much
of the temper of the City, and is able to acquaint therein as much
as most young men, being of large acquaintance, and himself, I think,
somewhat unsatisfied with the present state of things at Court and in
the Church. Then to the office, and there busy till late, and so home to
my wife, with some ease and pleasure that I hope to be able to follow
my business again, which by God’s leave I am resolved to return to
with more and more eagerness. I find at Court, that either the King is
doubtfull of some disturbance, or else would seem so (and I have reason
to hope it is no worse), by his commanding all commanders of castles,
&c., to repair to their charges; and mustering the Guards the other day
himself, where he found reason to dislike their condition to my Lord
Gerard, finding so many absent men, or dead pays.

     [This is probably an allusion to the practice of not reporting the
     deaths of soldiers, that the officers might continue to draw their
     pay.--B.]

My Lady Castlemaine, I hear, is in as great favour as ever, and the King
supped with her the very first night he came from Bath: and last night
and the night before supped with her; when there being a chine of beef
to roast, and the tide rising into their kitchen that it could not be
roasted there, and the cook telling her of it, she answered, “Zounds!
she must set the house on fire but it should be roasted!” So it was
carried to Mrs. Sarah’s husband’s, and there it was roasted. So home to
supper and to bed, being mightily pleased with all my house and my red
chamber, where my wife and I intend constantly to lie, and the having
of our dressing room and mayds close by us without any interfering or
trouble.