4th. Up betimes, and an hour at my viall, and then abroad by water to
White Hall and Westminster Hall, and there bought the first newes-books
of L’Estrange’s writing;

     [Roger L’Estrange, a voluminous writer of pamphlets and periodical
     papers, and translator of classics, &c.  Born 1616.  He was Licenser
     of the Press to Charles II. and James II.; and M.P. for Winchester
     in James II.’s parliament.  L’Estrange was knighted in the reign of
     James II., and died 1704.  In 1663 L’Estrange set up a paper called
     “The Public Intelligencer,” which came out on August 31st, and
     continued to be published twice a week till January 19th, 1665, when
     it was superseded by the scheme of publishing the “London Gazette,”
      the first number of which appeared on February 4th following.]

he beginning this week; and makes, methinks, but a simple beginning.
Then to speak to Mrs. Lane, who seems desirous to have me come to see
her and to have her company as I had a little while ago, which methinks
if she were very modest, considering how I tumbled her and tost her, she
should not. Thence to Mrs. Harper, and sent for Creed, and there Mrs.
Harper sent for a maid for me to come to live with my wife. I like the
maid’s looks well enough, and I believe may do well, she looking very
modestly and speaking so too. I directed her to speak with my wife, and
so Creed and I away to Mr. Povy’s, and he not being at home, walked
to Lincoln’s Inn walks, which they are making very fine, and about one
o’clock went back to Povy’s; and by and by in comes he, and so we sat
and down to dinner, and his lady, whom I never saw before (a handsome
old woman that brought him money that makes him do as he does), and so
we had plenty of meat and drink, though I drunk no wine, though mightily
urged to it, and in the exact manner that I never saw in my life any
where, and he the most full and satisfied in it that man can be in this
world with any thing. After dinner done, to see his new cellars, which
he has made so fine with so noble an arch and such contrivances for
his barrels and bottles, and in a room next to it such a grotto and
fountayne, which in summer will be so pleasant as nothing in the world
can be almost. But to see how he himself do pride himself too much
in it, and command and expect to have all admiration, though indeed
everything do highly deserve it, is a little troublesome. Thence Creed
and I away, and by his importunity away by coach to Bartholomew Fayre,
where I have no mind to go without my wife, and therefore rode through
the fayre without ‘lighting, and away home, leaving him there; and at
home made my wife get herself presently ready, and so carried her by
coach to the fayre, and showed her the monkeys dancing on the ropes,
which was strange, but such dirty sport that I was not pleased with it.
There was also a horse with hoofs like rams hornes, a goose with four
feet, and a cock with three. Thence to another place, and saw some
German Clocke works, the Salutation of the Virgin Mary, and several
Scriptural stories; but above all there was at last represented the sea,
with Neptune, Venus, mermaids, and Ayrid on a dolphin, the sea rocking,
so well done, that had it been in a gaudy manner and place, and at a
little distance, it had been admirable. Thence home by coach with my
wife, and I awhile to the office, and so to supper and to bed. This
day I read a Proclamation for calling in and commanding every body to
apprehend my Lord Bristoll.