22nd. Up, and by and by comes my uncle Thomas, to whom I paid L10 for
his last half year’s annuity, and did get his and his son’s hand and
seal for the confirming to us Piggott’s mortgage, which was forgot to be
expressed in our late agreement with him, though intended, and therefore
they might have cavilled at it, if they would. Thence abroad calling
at several places upon some errands, among others to my brother Tom’s
barber and had my hair cut, while his boy played on the viallin, a plain
boy, but has a very good genius, and understands the book very well, but
to see what a shift he made for a string of red silk was very pleasant.
Thence to my Lord Crew’s. My Lord not being come home, I met and staid
below with Captain Ferrers, who was come to wait upon my Lady Jemimah to
St. James’s, she being one of the four ladies that hold up the mantle at
the christening this afternoon of the Duke’s child (a boy). In
discourse of the ladies at Court, Captain Ferrers tells me that my Lady
Castlemaine is now as great again as ever she was; and that her going
away was only a fit of her own upon some slighting words of the King,
so that she called for her coach at a quarter of an hour’s warning, and
went to Richmond; and the King the next morning, under pretence of going
a-hunting, went to see her and make friends, and never was a-hunting at
all. After which she came back to Court, and commands the King as much
as ever, and hath and doth what she will. No longer ago than last night,
there was a private entertainment made for the King and Queen at the
Duke of Buckingham’s, and she: was not invited: but being at my Lady
Suffolk’s, her aunt’s (where my Lady Jemimah and Lord Sandwich dined)
yesterday, she was heard to say, “Well; much good may it do them, and
for all that I will be as merry as they:” and so she went home and
caused a great supper to be prepared. And after the King had been with
the Queen at Wallingford House, he came to my Lady Castlemaine’s, and
was there all night, and my Lord Sandwich with him, which was the reason
my Lord lay in town all night, which he has not done a great while
before. He tells me he believes that, as soon as the King can get a
husband for Mrs. Stewart however, my Lady Castlemaine’s nose will be out
of joynt; for that she comes to be in great esteem, and is more handsome
than she. I found by his words that my Lord Sandwich finds some pleasure
in the country where he now is, whether he means one of the daughters of
the house or no I know not, but hope the contrary, that he thinks he is
very well pleased with staying there, but yet upon breaking up of the
Parliament, which the King by a message to-day says shall be on Monday
next, he resolves to go. Ned Pickering, the coxcomb, notwithstanding all
his hopes of my Lord’s assistance, wherein I am sorry to hear my Lord
has much concerned himself, is defeated of the place he expected under
the Queen. He came hither by and by and brought some jewells for my Lady
Jem. to put on, with which and her other clothes she looks passing well.
I staid and dined with my Lord Crew, who whether he was not so well
pleased with me as he used to be, or that his head was full of business,
as I believe it was, he hardly spoke one word to me all dinner time,
we dining alone, only young Jack Crew, Sir Thomas’s son, with us. After
dinner I bade him farewell. Sir Thomas I hear has gone this morning ill
to bed, so I had no mind to see him. Thence homewards, and in the way
first called at Wotton’s, the shoemaker’s, who tells me the reason of
Harris’s’ going from Sir Wm. Davenant’s house, that he grew very proud
and demanded L20 for himself extraordinary, more than Betterton or any
body else, upon every new play, and L10 upon every revive; which with
other things Sir W. Davenant would not give him, and so he swore he
would never act there more, in expectation of being received in the
other House; but the King will not suffer it, upon Sir W. Davenant’s
desire that he would not, for then he might shut up house, and that
is true. He tells me that his going is at present a great loss to
the House, and that he fears he hath a stipend from the other House
privately. He tells the that the fellow grew very proud of late,
the King and every body else crying him up so high, and that above
Betterton, he being a more ayery man, as he is indeed. But yet
Betterton, he says, they all say do act: some parts that none but
himself can do. Thence to my bookseller’s, and found my Waggoners done.
The very binding cost me 14s., but they are well done, and so with a
porter home with them, and so by water to Ratcliffe, and there went
to speak with Cumberford the platt-maker, and there saw his manner of
working, which is very fine and laborious. So down to Deptford, reading
Ben Jonson’s “Devil is an asse,” and so to see Sir W. Pen, who I find
walking out of doors a little, but could not stand long; but in doors
and I with him, and staid a great while talking, I taking a liberty to
tell him my thoughts in things of the office; that when he comes abroad
again, he may know what to think of me, and to value me as he ought.
Walked home as I used to do, and being weary, and after some discourse
with Mr. Barrow, who came to see and take his leave of me, he being
to-morrow to set out toward the Isle of Man, I went to bed. This day
I hear that the Moores have made some attaques upon the outworks of
Tangier; but my Lord Tiviott; with the loss of about 200 men, did beat
them off, and killed many of them. To-morrow the King and Queen for
certain go down to Tunbridge. But the King comes hack again against
Monday to raise the Parliament.