14th (Lord’s day). Lay long in bed. So up and to church. Then to dinner,
and Tom dined with me, who I think grows a very thriving man, as he
himself tells me. He tells me that his man John has got a wife, and for
that he intends to part with him, which I am sorry for, and then that
Mr. Armiger comes to be a constant lodger at his house, and he says has
money in his purse and will be a good paymaster, but I do much doubt it.
He being gone, I up and sending my people to church, my wife and I did
even our reckonings, and had a great deal of serious talk, wherein I
took occasion to give her hints of the necessity of our saving all we
can. I do see great cause every day to curse the time that ever I did
give way to the taking of a woman for her, though I could never have had
a better, and also the letting of her learn to dance, by both which her
mind is so devilishly taken off her business and minding her occasions,
and besides has got such an opinion in her of my being jealous, that it
is never to be removed, I fear, nor hardly my trouble that attends it;
but I must have patience. I did give her 40s. to carry into the country
tomorrow with her, whereof 15s. is to go for the coach-hire for her and
Ashwell, there being 20s. paid here already in earnest. In the evening
our discourse turned to great content and love, and I hope that after
a little forgetting our late differences, and being a while absent one
from another, we shall come to agree as well as ever. So to Sir W. Pen’s
to visit him, and finding him alone, sent for my wife, who is in her
riding-suit, to see him, which she hath not done these many months I
think. By and by in comes Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten, and so we sat
talking. Among other things, Sir J. Minnes brought many fine expressions
of Chaucer, which he doats on mightily, and without doubt he is a very
fine poet.

     [Pepys continued through life an admirer of Chaucer, and we have the
     authority of Dryden himself for saying that we owe his character of
     the Good Parson to Pepys’s recommendation.]

Sir W. Pen continues lame of the gout, that he cannot rise from his
chair. So after staying an hour with him, we went home and to supper,
and so to prayers and bed.