9th. Up. Making water this morning, which I do every morning as soon as
I am awake, with greater plenty and freedom than I used to do, which I
think I may impute to last night’s drinking of elder spirits. Abroad, it
raining, to Blackfriars, and there went into a little alehouse and staid
while I sent to the Wardrobe, but Mr. Moore was gone out. Here I kissed
three or four times the maid of the house, who is a pretty girl, but
very modest, and, God forgive me, had a mind to something more. Thence
to my lawyer’s; up and down to the Six Clerks’ Office, where I found my
bill against Tom Trice dismissed, which troubles me, it being through my
neglect, and will put me to charges. So to Mr. Phillips, and discoursed
with him about finding me out somebody that will let me have for money
an annuity of about L100 per annum for two lives. So home, and there
put up my riding things against the evening, in case Mr. Moore should
continue his mind to go to Oxford, which I have little mind to do, the
weather continuing so bad and the waters high. Dined at home, and Mr.
Moore in the afternoon comes to me and concluded not to go. Sir W.
Batten and I sat a little this afternoon at the office, and thence I by
water to Deptford, and there mustered the Yard, purposely, God forgive
me, to find out Bagwell, a carpenter, whose wife is a pretty woman, that
I might have some occasion of knowing him and forcing her to come to the
office again, which I did so luckily that going thence he and his wife
did of themselves meet me in the way to thank me for my old kindness,
but I spoke little to her, but shall give occasion for her coming to me.
Her husband went along with me to show me Sir W. Pen’s lodging, which
I knew before, but only to have a time of speaking to him and sounding
him. So left and I went in to Sir W. Pen, who continues ill, and worse,
I think, than before. He tells me my Lady Castlemaine was at Court, for
all this talk this week, which I am glad to hear; but it seems the King
is stranger than ordinary to her. Thence walked home as I used to do,
and to bed presently, having taken great cold in my feet by walking in
the dirt this day in thin shoes or some other way, so that I begun to be
in pain, and with warm clothes made myself better by morning, but yet in
pain.