26th (Lord’s-day). Up and to the Wells,

     [Epsom medicinal wells were discovered about 1618, but they did not
     become fashionable until the Restoration.  John Toland, in his
     “Description of Epsom,” says that he often counted seventy coaches in
     the Ring (the present racecourse on the Downs) on a Sunday evening;
     but by the end of the eighteenth century Epsom had entirely lost its
     vogue.]

where great store of citizens, which was the greatest part of the
company, though there were some others of better quality. I met many
that I knew, and we drank each of us two pots and so walked away, it
being very pleasant to see how everybody turns up his tail, here one
and there another, in a bush, and the women in their quarters the like.
Thence I walked with Creed to Mr. Minnes’s house, which has now a very
good way made to it, and thence to Durdans and walked round it and
within the Court Yard and to the Bowling-green, where I have seen so
much mirth in my time; but now no family in it (my Lord Barkeley, whose
it is, being with his family at London), and so up and down by Minnes’s
wood, with great pleasure viewing my old walks, and where Mrs. Hely and
I did use to walk and talk, with whom I had the first sentiments of love
and pleasure in woman’s company, discourse, and taking her by the hand,
she being a pretty woman. So I led him to Ashted Church (by the place
where Peter, my cozen’s man, went blindfold and found a certain place
we chose for him upon a wager), where we had a dull Doctor, one Downe,
worse than I think even parson King was, of whom we made so much scorn,
and after sermon home, and staid while our dinner, a couple of large
chickens, were dressed, and a good mess of cream, which anon we had with
good content, and after dinner (we taking no notice of other lodgers in
the house, though there was one that I knew, and knew and spoke to
me, one Mr. Rider, a merchant), he and I to walk, and I led him to the
pretty little wood behind my cozens house, into which we got at last by
clambering, and our little dog with us, but when we were among the hazel
trees and bushes, Lord! what a course did we run for an hour together,
losing ourselves, and indeed I despaired I should ever come to any path,
but still from thicket to thicket, a thing I could hardly have believed
a man could have been lost so long in so small a room. At last I found
out a delicate walk in the middle that goes quite through the wood, and
then went out of the wood, and holloed Mr. Creed, and made him hunt me
from place to place, and at last went in and called him into my fine
walk, the little dog still hunting with us through the wood. In this
walk being all bewildered and weary and sweating, Creed he lay down upon
the ground, which I did a little, but I durst not long, but walked from
him in the fine green walk, which is half a mile long, there reading
my vows as I used to on Sundays. And after that was done, and going and
lying by Creed an hour, he and I rose and went to our lodging and paid
our reckoning, and so mounted, whether to go toward London home or to
find a new lodging, and so rode through Epsum, the whole town over,
seeing the various companys that were there walking; which was very
pleasant to see how they are there without knowing almost what to do,
but only in the morning to drink waters. But, Lord! to see how many I
met there of citizens, that I could not have thought to have seen
there, or that they had ever had it in their heads or purses to go down
thither. We rode out of the town through Yowell beyond Nonesuch House a
mile, and there our little dogg, as he used to do, fell a-running after
a flock of sheep feeding on the common, till he was out of sight, and
then endeavoured to come back again, and went to the last gate that he
parted with us at, and there the poor thing mistakes our scent, instead
of coming forward he hunts us backward, and runs as hard as he could
drive back towards Nonesuch, Creed and I after him, and being by many
told of his going that way and the haste he made, we rode still and
passed him through Yowell, and there we lost any further information of
him. However, we went as far as Epsum almost, hearing nothing of him,
we went back to Yowell, and there was told that he did pass through
the town. We rode back to Nonesuch to see whether he might be gone back
again, but hearing nothing we with great trouble and discontent for the
loss of our dogg came back once more to Yowell, and there set up our
horses and selves for all night, employing people to look for the dogg
in the town, but can hear nothing of him. However, we gave order for
supper, and while that was dressing walked out through Nonesuch Park
to the house, and there viewed as much as we could of the outside, and
looked through the great gates, and found a noble court; and altogether
believe it to have been a very noble house, and a delicate park about
it, where just now there was a doe killed, for the King to carry up to
Court. So walked back again, and by and by our supper being ready, a
good leg of mutton boiled, we supped and to bed, upon two beds in the
same room, wherein we slept most excellently all night.