31st (Lord’s day). Lay long in bed talking with my wife, and do plainly
see that her distaste (which is beginning now in her again) against
Ashwell arises from her jealousy of me and her, and my neglect of
herself, which indeed is true, and I to blame; but for the time to come
I will take care to remedy all. So up and to church, where I think I did
see Pembleton, whatever the reason is I did not perceive him to look up
towards my wife, nor she much towards him; however, I could hardly keep
myself from being troubled that he was there, which is a madness not
to be excused now that his coming to my house is past, and I hope all
likelyhood of her having occasion to converse with him again. Home to
dinner, and after dinner up and read part of the new play of “The Five
Houres’ Adventures,” which though I have seen it twice; yet I never did
admire or understand it enough, it being a play of the greatest plot
that ever I expect to see, and of great vigour quite through the whole
play, from beginning to the end. To church again after dinner (my wife
finding herself ill.... did not go), and there the Scot preaching
I slept most of the sermon. This day Sir W. Batten’s son’s child is
christened in the country, whither Sir J. Minnes, and Sir W, Batten, and
Sir W. Pen are all gone. I wonder, and take it highly ill that I am not
invited by the father, though I know his father and mother, with whom I
am never likely to have much kindness, but rather I study the contrary,
are the cause of it, and in that respect I am glad of it. Being come
from church, I to make up my month’s accounts, and find myself clear
worth L726, for which God be praised, but yet I might have been better
by L20 almost had I forborne some layings out in dancing and other
things upon my wife, and going to plays and other things merely to ease
my mind as to the business of the dancing-master, which I bless God is
now over and I falling to my quiet of mind and business again, which I
have for a fortnight neglected too much. This month the greatest news
is, the height and heat that the Parliament is in, in enquiring into the
revenue, which displeases the Court, and their backwardness to give the
King any money. Their enquiring into the selling of places do trouble
a great many among the chief, my Lord Chancellor (against whom
particularly it is carried), and Mr. Coventry; for which I am sorry. The
King of France was given out to be poisoned and dead; but it proves to
be the measles: and he is well, or likely to be soon well again. I find
myself growing in the esteem and credit that I have in the office, and I
hope falling to my business again will confirm me in it, and the saving
of money which God grant! So to supper, prayers, and bed. My whole
family lying longer this morning than was fit, and besides Will having
neglected to brush my clothes, as he ought to do, till I was ready to
go to church, and not then till I bade him, I was very angry, and
seeing him make little matter of it, but seeming to make it a matter
indifferent whether he did it or no, I did give him a box on the ear,
and had it been another day should have done more. This is the second
time I ever struck him.