19th. Lay till 6 o’clock, and then up and to my office, where all the
morning, and at noon to the Exchange, and coming home met Mr. Creed, and
took him back, and he dined with me, and by and by came Mr. Moore, whom
I supplied with L30, and then abroad with them by water to Lambeth,
expecting to have seen the Archbishop lie in state; but it seems he
is not laid out yet. And so over to White Hall, and at the Privy Seal
Office examined the books, and found the grant of increase of salary
to the principall officers in the year 1639, L300 among the Controller,
Surveyor, and Clerk of the Shippes. Thence to Wilkinson’s after a good
walk in the Park, where we met on horseback Captain Ferrers; who tells
us that the King of France is well again, and that he saw him train his
Guards, all brave men, at Paris; and that when he goes to his mistress,
Madame la Valiere, a pretty little woman, now with child by him, he goes
with his guards with him publiquely, and his trumpets and kettle-drums
with him, who stay before the house while he is with her; and yet he
says that, for all this, the Queen do not know of it, for that nobody
dares to tell her; but that I dare not believe. Thence I to Wilkinson’s,
where we had bespoke a dish of pease, where we eat them very merrily,
and there being with us the little gentleman, a friend of Captain
Ferrers, that was with my wife and I at a play a little while ago, we
went thence to the Rhenish wine-house, where we called for a red Rhenish
wine called Bleahard, a pretty wine, and not mixed, as they say. Here
Mr. Moore showed us the French manner, when a health is drunk, to bow
to him that drunk to you, and then apply yourself to him, whose lady’s
health is drunk, and then to the person that you drink to, which I never
knew before; but it seems it is now the fashion. Thence by water home
and to bed, having played out of my chamber window on my pipe before I
went to bed, and making Will read a part of a Latin chapter, in which I
perceive in a little while he will be pretty ready, if he spends but a
little pains in it.