19th. Up and to White Hall, and while the Duke is dressing himself I
went to wait on my Lord Sandwich, whom I found not very well, and Dr.
Clerke with him. He is feverish, and hath sent for Mr. Pierce to let him
blood, but not being in the way he puts it off till night, but he stirs
not abroad to-day. Then to the Duke, and in his closett discoursed as we
use to do, and then broke up. That done, I singled out Mr. Coventry into
the Matted Gallery, and there I told him the complaints I meet every
day about our Treasurer’s or his people’s paying no money, but at
the goldsmith’s shops, where they are forced to pay fifteen or twenty
sometimes per cent. for their money, which is a most horrid shame, and
that which must not be suffered. Nor is it likely that the Treasurer
(at least his people) will suffer Maynell the Goldsmith to go away with
L10,000 per annum, as he do now get, by making people pay after this
manner for their money. We were interrupted by the Duke, who called Mr.
Coventry aside for half an hour, walking with him in the gallery, and
then in the garden, and then going away I ended my discourse with Mr.
Coventry. But by the way Mr. Coventry was saying that there remained
nothing now in our office to be amended but what would do of itself
every day better and better, for as much as he that was slowest, Sir W.
Batten, do now begin to look about him and to mind business. At which,
God forgive me! I was a little moved with envy, but yet I am glad, and
ought to be, though it do lessen a little my care to see that the King’s
service is like to be better attended than it was heretofore. Thence
by coach to Mr. Povy’s, being invited thither by [him] came a messenger
this morning from him, where really he made a most excellent and large
dinner, of their variety, even to admiration, he bidding us, in a
frolique, to call for what we had a mind, and he would undertake to give
it us: and we did for prawns, swan, venison, after I had thought the
dinner was quite done, and he did immediately produce it, which I
thought great plenty, and he seems to set off his rest in this plenty
and the neatness of his house, which he after dinner showed me, from
room to room, so beset with delicate pictures, and above all, a piece of
perspective in his closett in the low parler; his stable, where was some
most delicate horses, and the very-racks painted, and mangers, with a
neat leaden painted cistern, and the walls done with Dutch tiles, like
my chimnies. But still, above all things, he bid me go down into his
wine-cellar, where upon several shelves there stood bottles of all sorts
of wine, new and old, with labells pasted upon each bottle, and in
the order and plenty as I never saw books in a bookseller’s shop; and
herein, I observe, he puts his highest content, and will accordingly
commend all that he hath, but still they deserve to be so. Here dined
with me Dr. Whore and Mr. Scawen. Therewith him and Mr. Bland, whom we
met by the way, to my Lord Chancellor’s, where the King was to meet my
Lord Treasurer, &c., many great men, to settle the revenue of Tangier.
I staid talking awhile there, but the King not coming I walked to my
brother’s, where I met my cozen Scotts (Tom not being at home) and sent
for a glass of wine for them, and having drunk we parted, and I to the
Wardrobe talking with Mr. Moore about my law businesses, which I doubt
will go ill for want of time for me to attend them. So home, where I
found Mrs. Lodum speaking with my wife about her kinswoman which is
offered my wife to come as a woman to her. So to the office and put
things in order, and then home and to bed, it being my great comfort
that every day I understand more and more the pleasure of following of
business and the credit that a man gets by it, which I hope at last too
will end in profit. This day, by Dr. Clerke, I was told the occasion
of my Lord Chesterfield’s going and taking his lady (my Lord Ormond’s
daughter) from Court. It seems he not only hath been long jealous of the
Duke of York, but did find them two talking together, though there were
others in the room, and the lady by all opinions a most good, virtuous
woman. He, the next day (of which the Duke was warned by somebody that
saw the passion my Lord Chesterfield was in the night before), went and
told the Duke how much he did apprehend himself wronged, in his picking
out his lady of the whole Court to be the subject of his dishonour;
which the Duke did answer with great calmness, not seeming to understand
the reason of complaint, and that was all that passed but my Lord did
presently pack his lady into the country in Derbyshire, near the Peake;
which is become a proverb at Court, to send a man’s wife to the Devil’s
arse a’ Peake, when she vexes him. This noon I did find out Mr. Dixon at
Whitehall, and discoursed with him about Mrs. Wheatly’s daughter for
a wife for my brother Tom, and have committed it to him to enquire the
pleasure of her father and mother concerning it. I demanded L300.