12th. A little to my office, to put down my yesterday’s journall, and so
abroad to buy a bedstead and do other things. So home again, and having
put up the bedstead and done other things in order to my wife’s coming,
I went out to several places and to Mrs. Turner’s, she inviting me last
night, and there dined; with her and Madam Morrice and a stranger we
were very merry and had a fine dinner, and thence I took leave and to
White Hall, where my Lords Sandwich, Peterborough, and others made a
Tangier Committee; spent the afternoon in reading and ordering with a
great deal of alteration, and yet methinks never a whit the better, of
a letter drawn by Creed to my Lord Rutherford. The Lords being against
anything that looked to be rough, though it was in matter of money and
accounts, wherein their courtship may cost the King dear. Only I do see
by them, that speaking in matters distasteful to him that we write
to, it is best to do it in the plainest way and without ambages or
reasoning, but only say matters of fact, and leave the party to collect
your meaning. Thence by water to my brother’s, and there I hear my wife
is come and gone home, and my father is come to town also, at which
I wondered. But I discern it is to give my brother advice about his
business, and it may be to pacify me about the differences that have
been between my wife and him and my mother at her late being with them.
Though by and by he coming to Mr. Holden’s (where I was buying a hat)
he took no notice to me of anything. I talked to him a little while and
left him to lie at the end of the town, and I home, where methought I
found my wife strange, not knowing, I believe, in what temper she could
expect me to be in, but I fell to kind words, and so we were very kind,
only she could not forbear telling me how she had been used by them and
her mayde, Ashwell, in the country, but I find it will be best not to
examine it, for I doubt she’s in fault too, and therefore I seek to put
it off from my hearing, and so to bed and there entertained her with
great content, and so to sleep.