24th. Up before 4 o’clock, and so to my lute an hour or more, and then
by water, drinking my morning draft alone at an alehouse in Thames
Street, to the Temple, and thence after a little discourse with my cozen
Roger about some business, away by water to St. James’s, and there an
hour’s private discourse with Mr. Coventry, where he told me one thing
to my great joy, that in the business of Captain Cocke’s hemp, disputed
before him the other day, Mr. Coventry absent, the Duke did himself tell
him since, that Mr. Pepys and he did stand up and carry it against the
rest that were there, Sir G. Carteret and Sir W. Batten, which do please
me much to see that the Duke do take notice of me. We did talk highly of
Sir W. Batten’s corruption, which Mr. Coventry did very kindly say that
it might be only his heaviness and unaptness for business, that he do
things without advice and rashly, and to gratify people that do eat and
drink and play with him, and that now and then he observes that he
signs bills only in anger and fury to be rid of men. Speaking of Sir G.
Carteret, of whom I perceive he speaks but slightly, and diminishing of
him in his services for the King in Jersey; that he was well rewarded,
and had good lands and rents, and other profits from the King, all the
time he was there; and that it was always his humour to have things done
his way. He brought an example how he would not let the Castle there be
victualled for more than a month, that so he might keep it at his
beck, though the people of the town did offer to supply it more often
themselves, which, when one did propose to the King, Sir George Carteret
being by, says Sir George, “Let me know who they are that would do it, I
would with all my heart pay them.” “Ah, by God,” says the Commander that
spoke of it, “that is it that they are afeard of, that you would hug
them,” meaning that he would not endure them. Another thing he told me,
how the Duke of York did give Sir G. Carteret and the Island his profits
as Admirall, and other things, toward the building of a pier there. But
it was never laid out, nor like to be. So it falling out that a lady
being brought to bed, the Duke was to be desired to be one of the
godfathers; and it being objected that that would not be proper, there
being no peer of the land to be joyned with him, the lady replied, “Why,
let him choose; and if he will not be a godfather without a peer, then
let him even stay till he hath made a pier of his own.”

     [In the same spirit, long after this, some question arising as to
     the best material to be used in building Westminster Bridge, Lord
     Chesterfield remarked, that there were too many wooden piers (peers)
     at Westminster already.--B.]

He tells me, too, that he hath lately been observed to tack about at
Court, and to endeavour to strike in with the persons that are against
the Chancellor; but this he says of him, that he do not say nor do
anything to the prejudice of the Chancellor. But he told me that the
Chancellor was rising again, and that of late Sir G. Carteret’s
business and employment hath not been so full as it used to be while the
Chancellor stood up. From that we discoursed of the evil of putting out
men of experience in business as the Chancellor, and from that to speak
of the condition of the King’s party at present, who, as the Papists,
though otherwise fine persons, yet being by law kept for these fourscore
years out of employment, they are now wholly uncapable of business; and
so the Cavaliers for twenty years, who, says he, for the most part have
either given themselves over to look after country and family business,
and those the best of them, and the rest to debauchery, &c.; and that
was it that hath made him high against the late Bill brought into the
House for the making all men incapable of employment that had served
against the King. Why, says he, in the sea-service, it is impossible to
do any thing without them, there being not more than three men of the
whole King’s side that are fit to command almost; and these were Captain
Allen, Smith, and Beech; and it may be Holmes, and Utber, and Batts
might do something. I desired him to tell me if he thought that I did
speak anything that I do against Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes out of
ill will or design. He told me quite the contrary, and that there was
reason enough. After a good deal of good and fine discourse, I took
leave, and so to my Lord Sandwich’s house, where I met my Lord, and
there did discourse of our office businesses, and how the Duke do show
me kindness, though I have endeavoured to displease more or less of my
fellow officers, all but Mr. Coventry and Pett; but it matters not. Yes,
says my Lord, Sir J. Minnes, who is great with the Chancellor; I told
him the Chancellor I have thought was declining, and however that the
esteem he has among them is nothing but for a jester or a ballad maker;
at which my Lord laughs, and asks me whether I believe he ever could do
that well. Thence with Mr. Creed up and down to an ordinary, and, the
King’s Head being full, went to the other over against it, a pretty man
that keeps it, and good and much meat, better than the other, but
the company and room so small that he must break, and there wants the
pleasure that the other house has in its company. Here however dined an
old courtier that is now so, who did bring many examples and arguments
to prove that seldom any man that brings any thing to Court gets any
thing, but rather the contrary; for knowing that they have wherewith to
live, will not enslave themselves to the attendance, and flattery, and
fawning condition of a courtier, whereas another that brings nothing,
and will be contented to cog, and lie, and flatter every man and woman
that has any interest with the persons that are great in favour, and can
cheat the King, as nothing is to be got without offending God and the
King, there he for the most part, and he alone, saves any thing. Thence
to St. James Park, and there walked two or three hours talking of the
difference between Sir G. Carteret and Mr. Creed about his accounts,
and how to obviate him, but I find Creed a deadly cunning fellow and one
that never do any thing openly, but has intrigues in all he do or says.
Thence by water home to see all well, and thence down to Greenwich, and
there walked into a pretty common garden and there played with him at
nine pins for some drink, and to make the fellows drink that set up the
pins, and so home again being very cold, and taking a very great cold,
being to-day the first time in my tabby doublet this year. Home, and
after a small supper Creed and I to bed. This day I observed the house,
which I took to be the new tennis-court, newly built next my Lord’s
lodgings, to be fallen down by the badness of the foundation or slight
working, which my cozen Roger and his discontented party cry out upon,
as an example how the King’s work is done, which I am sorry to see him
and others so apt to think ill of things. It hath beaten down a good
deal of my Lord’s lodgings, and had like to have killed Mrs. Sarah, she
having but newly gone out of it.