15th. Up and by appointment with Captain Witham (the Captain that
brought the newes of the disaster at Tangier, where my Lord Tiviott was
slain) and Mr. Tooker to Beares Quay, and there saw and more afterward
at the several grannarys several parcels of oates, and strange it is to
hear how it will heat itself if laid up green and not often turned. We
came not to any agreement, but did cheapen several parcels, and thence
away, promising to send again to them. So to the Victualling office, and
then home. And in our garden I got Captain Witham to tell me the whole
story of my Lord Tiviott’s misfortune; for he was upon the guard with
his horse neare the towne, when at a distance he saw the enemy appear
upon a hill, a mile and a half off, and made up to them, and with much
ado escaped himself; but what became of my Lord he neither knows nor
thinks that any body but the enemy can tell. Our losse was about four
hundred. But he tells me that the greater wonder is that my Lord Tiviott
met no sooner with such a disaster; for every day he did commit himself
to more probable danger than this, for now he had the assurance of all
his scouts that there was no enemy thereabouts; whereas he used every
day to go out with two or three with him, to make his discoveries, in
greater danger, and yet the man that could not endure to have anybody
else to go a step out of order to endanger himself. He concludes him to
be the man of the hardest fate to lose so much honour at one blow that
ever was. His relation being done he parted; and so I home to look after
things for dinner. And anon at noon comes Mr. Creed by chance, and by
and by the three young ladies:--[Lord Sandwich’s daughters.]--and
very merry we were with our pasty, very well baked; and a good dish of
roasted chickens; pease, lobsters, strawberries. And after dinner to
cards: and about five o’clock, by water down to Greenwich; and up to the
top of the hill, and there played upon the ground at cards. And so to
the Cherry Garden, and then by water singing finely to the Bridge, and
there landed; and so took boat again, and to Somersett House. And by
this time, the tide being against us, it was past ten of the clock; and
such a troublesome passage, in regard of my Lady Paulina’s fearfullness,
that in all my life I never did see any poor wretch in that condition.
Being come hither, there waited for them their coach; but it being so
late, I doubted what to do how to get them home. After half an hour’s
stay in the street, I sent my wife home by coach with Mr. Creed’s boy;
and myself and Creed in the coach home with them. But, Lord! the fear
that my Lady Paulina was in every step of the way; and indeed at this
time of the night it was no safe thing to go that road; so that I was
even afeard myself, though I appeared otherwise.--We came safe, however,
to their house, where all were abed; we knocked them up, my Lady and all
the family being in bed. So put them into doors; and leaving them with
the mayds, bade them good night, and then into the towne, Creed and I,
it being about twelve o’clock and past; and to several houses, inns, but
could get no lodging, all being in bed. At the last house, at last,
we found some people drinking and roaring; and there got in, and after
drinking, got an ill bed, where