2nd. Up and to the office, where, though Candlemas day, Mr. Coventry
and Sir W. Pen and I all the morning, the others being at a survey at
Deptford. At noon by coach to the ‘Change with Mr. Coventry, thence to
the Coffee-house with Captain Coeke, who discoursed well of the good
effects in some kind of a Dutch warr and conquest (which I did not
consider before, but the contrary) that is, that the trade of the world
is too little for us two, therefore one must down: 2ndly, that though
our merchants will not be the better husbands by all this, yet our wool
will bear a better price by vaunting of our cloths, and by that our
tenants will be better able to pay rents, and our lands will be more
worth, and all our owne manufactures, which now the Dutch outvie us in;
that he thinks the Dutch are not in so good a condition as heretofore
because of want of men always, and now from the warrs against the Turke
more than ever. Then to the ‘Change again, and thence off to the Sun
Taverne with Sir W. Warren, and with him discoursed long, and had good
advice, and hints from him, and among other things he did give me a
payre of gloves for my wife wrapt up in paper, which I would not open,
feeling it hard; but did tell him that my wife should thank him, and so
went on in discourse. When I came home, Lord! in what pain I was to get
my wife out of the room without bidding her go, that I might see what
these gloves were; and, by and by, she being gone, it proves a payre of
white gloves for her and forty pieces in good gold, which did so cheer
my heart, that I could eat no victuals almost for dinner for joy to
think how God do bless us every day more and more, and more yet I hope
he will upon the increase of my duty and endeavours. I was at great
losse what to do, whether tell my wife of it or no, which I could hardly
forbear, but yet I did and will think of it first before I do, for fear
of making her think me to be in a better condition, or in a better way
of getting money, than yet I am. After dinner to the office, where doing
infinite of business till past to at night to the comfort of my mind,
and so home with joy to supper and to bed. This evening Mr. Hempson came
and told me how Sir W, Batten his master will not hear of continuing him
in his employment as Clerk of the Survey at Chatham, from whence of a
sudden he has removed him without any new or extraordinary cause, and I
believe (as he himself do in part write, and J. Norman do confess) for
nothing but for that he was twice with me the other day and did not wait
upon him. So much he fears me and all that have to do with me. Of this
more in the Mem. Book of my office upon this day, there I shall find it.