14th. My mind being doubtful what the business should be, I rose a
little after four o’clock, and abroad. Walked to my Lord’s, and nobody
up, but the porter rose out of bed to me so I back again to Fleete
Streete, and there bought a little book of law; and thence, hearing a
psalm sung, I went into St. Dunstan’s, and there heard prayers read,
which, it seems, is done there every morning at six o’clock; a thing I
never did do at a chappell, but the College Chappell, in all my life.
Thence to my Lord’s again, and my Lord being up, was sent for up, and
he and I alone. He did begin with a most solemn profession of the same
confidence in and love for me that he ever had, and then told me what a
misfortune was fallen upon me and him: in me, by a displeasure which my
Lord Chancellor did show to him last night against me, in the highest
and most passionate manner that ever any man did speak, even to the not
hearing of any thing to be said to him: but he told me, that he did say
all that could be said for a man as to my faithfullnesse and duty to his
Lordship, and did me the greatest right imaginable. And what should the
business be, but that I should be forward to have the trees in Clarendon
Park marked and cut down, which he, it seems, hath bought of my Lord
Albemarle; when, God knows! I am the most innocent man in the world in
it, and did nothing of myself, nor knew of his concernment therein, but
barely obeyed my Lord Treasurer’s warrant for the doing thereof. And
said that I did most ungentlemanlike with him, and had justified the
rogues in cutting down a tree of his; and that I had sent the veriest
Fanatique [Deane] that is in England to mark them, on purpose to
nose--[provoke]--him. All which, I did assure my Lord, was most properly
false, and nothing like it true; and told my Lord the whole passage. My
Lord do seem most nearly affected; he is partly, I believe, for me, and
partly for himself. So he advised me to wait presently upon my Lord, and
clear myself in the most perfect manner I could, with all submission and
assurance that I am his creature both in this and all other things; and
that I do owne that all I have, is derived through my Lord Sandwich from
his Lordship. So, full of horror, I went, and found him busy in tryals
of law in his great room; and it being Sitting-day, durst not stay, but
went to my Lord and told him so: whereupon he directed me to take him
after dinner; and so away I home, leaving my Lord mightily concerned for
me. I to the office, and there sat busy all the morning. At noon to the
‘Change, and from the ‘Change over with Alsopp and the others to the
Pope’s Head tavern, and there staid a quarter of an hour, and concluded
upon this, that in case I got them no more than 3s. per week per man
I should have of them but L150 per ann., but to have it without any
adventure or charge, but if I got them 3s. 2d., then they would give me
L300 in the like manner. So I directed them to draw up their tender in
a line or two against the afternoon, and to meet me at White Hall. So
I left them, and I to my Lord Chancellor’s; and there coming out after
dinner I accosted him, telling him that I was the unhappy Pepys that
had fallen into his high displeasure, and come to desire him to give me
leave to make myself better understood to his Lordship, assuring him
of my duty and service. He answered me very pleasingly, that he was
confident upon the score of my Lord Sandwich’s character of me, but that
he had reason to think what he did, and desired me to call upon him some
evening: I named to-night, and he accepted of it. So with my heart light
I to White Hall, and there after understanding by a stratagem, and yet
appearing wholly desirous not to understand Mr. Gauden’s price when he
desired to show it me, I went down and ordered matters in our tender
so well that at the meeting by and by I was ready with Mr. Gauden’s
and his, both directed him a letter to me to give the board their two
tenders, but there being none but the Generall Monk and Mr. Coventry and
Povy and I, I did not think fit to expose them to view now, but put it
off till Saturday, and so with good content rose. Thence I to the Half
Moone, against the ‘Change, to acquaint Lanyon and his friends of our
proceedings, and thence to my Lord Chancellor’s, and there heard several
tryals, wherein I perceive my Lord is a most able and ready man. After
all done, he himself called, “Come, Mr. Pepys, you and I will take a
turn in the garden.” So he was led down stairs, having the goute, and
there walked with me, I think, above an houre, talking most friendly,
yet cunningly. I told him clearly how things were; how ignorant I was
of his Lordship’s concernment in it; how I did not do nor say one word
singly, but what was done was the act of the whole Board. He told me by
name that he was more angry with Sir G. Carteret than with me, and also
with the whole body of the Board. But thinking who it was of the Board
that knew him least, he did place his fear upon me; but he finds that
he is indebted to none of his friends there. I think I did thoroughly
appease him, till he thanked me for my desire and pains to satisfy him;
and upon my desiring to be directed who I should of his servants advise
with about this business, he told me nobody, but would be glad to hear
from me himself. He told me he would not direct me in any thing, that it
might not be said that the Lord Chancellor did labour to abuse the King;
or (as I offered) direct the suspending the Report of the Purveyors but
I see what he means, and I will make it my worke to do him service
in it. But, Lord! to see how he is incensed against poor Deane, as a
fanatique rogue, and I know not what: and what he did was done in spite
to his Lordship, among all his friends and tenants. He did plainly say
that he would not direct me in any thing, for he would not put himself
into the power of any man to say that he did so and so; but plainly
told me as if he would be glad I did something. Lord! to see how we poor
wretches dare not do the King good service for fear of the greatness of
these men. He named Sir G. Carteret, and Sir J. Minnes, and the rest;
and that he was as angry with them all as me. But it was pleasant to
think that, while he was talking to me, comes into the garden Sir G.
Carteret; and my Lord avoided speaking with him, and made him and many
others stay expecting him, while I walked up and down above an houre, I
think; and would have me walk with my hat on. And yet, after all this,
there has been so little ground for this his jealousy of me, that I am
sometimes afeard that he do this only in policy to bring me to his side
by scaring me; or else, which is worse, to try how faithfull I would
be to the King; but I rather think the former of the two. I parted with
great assurance how I acknowledged all I had to come from his Lordship;
which he did not seem to refuse, but with great kindness and respect
parted. So I by coach home, calling at my Lord’s, but he not within. At
my office late, and so home to eat something, being almost starved for
want of eating my dinner to-day, and so to bed, my head being full of
great and many businesses of import to me.