13th. So up at 5 o’clock, and with Captain Taylor on board her at
Deptford, and found all out of order, only the soldiers civil, and Sir
Arthur Bassett a civil person. I rated at Captain Taylor, whom, contrary
to my expectation, I found a lying and a very stupid blundering fellow,
good for nothing, and yet we talk of him in the Navy as if he had been
an excellent officer, but I find him a lying knave, and of no judgment
or dispatch at all. After finding the condition of the ship, no master,
not above four men, and many ship’s provisions, sayls, and other things
wanting, I went back and called upon Fudge, whom I found like a lying
rogue unready to go on board, but I did so jeer him that I made him get
every thing ready, and left Taylor and H. Russell to quicken him, and so
away and I by water on to White Hall, where I met his Royal Highnesse at
a Tangier Committee about this very thing, and did there satisfy him how
things are, at which all was pacified without any trouble, and I hope
may end well, but I confess I am at a real trouble for fear the rogue
should not do his work, and I come to shame and losse of the money I did
hope justly to have got by it. Thence walked with Mr. Coventry to St.
James’s, and there spent by his desire the whole morning reading of some
old Navy books given him of old Sir John Cooke’s by the Archbishop of
Canterbury that now is; wherein the order that was observed in the Navy
then, above what it is now, is very observable, and fine things we did
observe in our reading. Anon to dinner, after dinner to discourse of the
business of the Dutch warr, wherein he tells me the Dutch do in every
particular, which are but few and small things that we can demand
of them, whatever cry we unjustly make, do seem to offer at an
accommodation, for they do owne that it is not for their profit to have
warr with England. We did also talk of a History of the Navy of England,
how fit it were to be writ; and he did say that it hath been in his
mind to propose to me the writing of the History of the late Dutch
warr, which I am glad to hear, it being a thing I much desire, and sorts
mightily with my genius; and, if well done, may recommend me much. So he
says he will get me an order for making of searches to all records, &c.,
in order thereto, and I shall take great delight in doing of it. Thence
by water down to the Tower, and thither sent for Mr. Creed to my house,
where he promised to be, and he and I down to the ship, and find all
things in pretty good order, and I hope will end to my mind. Thence
having a gaily down to Greenwich, and there saw the King’s works, which
are great, a-doing there, and so to the Cherry Garden, and so carried
some cherries home, and after supper to bed, my wife lying with me,
which from my not being thoroughly well, nor she, we have not done above
once these two or three weeks.