17th. Up, and going to Sir W. Batten to speak to him about business,
he did give me three, bottles of his Epsum water, which I drank and
it wrought well with me, and did give me many good stools, and I found
myself mightily cooled with them and refreshed. Thence I to Mr. Honiwood
and my father’s old house, but he was gone out, and there I staid
talking with his man Herbert, who tells me how Langford and his wife are
very foul-mouthed people, and will speak very ill of my father, calling
him old rogue in reference to the hard penniworths he sold him of his
goods when the rogue need not have bought any of them. So that I am
resolved he shall get no more money by me, but it vexes me to think that
my father should be said to go away in debt himself, but that I will
cause to be remedied whatever comes of it. Thence to my Lord Crew, and
there with him a little while. Before dinner talked of the Dutch war,
and find that he do much doubt that we shall fall into it without the
money or consent of Parliament, that is expected or the reason of it
that is fit to have for every warr. Dined with him, and after dinner
talked with Sir Thomas Crew, who told me how Mr. Edward Montagu is
for ever blown up, and now quite out with his father again; to whom
he pretended that his going down was, not that he was cast out of the
Court, but that he had leave to be absent a month; but now he finds the
truth. Thence to my Lady Sandwich, where by agreement my wife dined, and
after talking with her I carried my wife to Mr. Pierce’s and left her
there, and so to Captain Cooke’s, but he was not at home, but I there
spoke with my boy Tom Edwards, and directed him to go to Mr. Townsend
(with whom I was in the morning) to have measure taken of his clothes to
be made him there out of the Wardrobe, which will be so done, and then
I think he will come to me. Thence to White Hall, and after long staying
there was no Committee of the Fishery as was expected. Here I walked
long with Mr. Pierce, who tells me the King do still sup every night
with my Lady Castlemayne, who he believes has lately slunk a great belly
away, for from very big she is come to be down again. Thence to Mrs.
Pierce’s, and with her and my wife to see Mrs. Clarke, where with him
and her very merry discoursing of the late play of Henry the 5th, which
they conclude the best that ever was made, but confess with me that
Tudor’s being dismissed in the manner he is is a great blemish to the
play. I am mightily pleased with the Doctor, for he is the only man I
know that I could learn to pronounce by, which he do the best that ever
I heard any man. Thence home and to the office late, and so to supper
and to bed. My Lady Pen came hither first to-night to Sir W. Pen’s
lodgings.