20th. Up and to my office, whither by and by comes Mr. Cholmely, and
staying till the rest of the company come he told me how Mr. Edward
Montagu is turned out of the Court, not [to] return again. His fault,
I perceive, was his pride, and most of all his affecting to seem great
with the Queene and it seems indeed had more of her eare than any body
else, and would be with her talking alone two or three hours together;
insomuch that the Lords about the King, when he would be jesting with
them about their wives, would tell the King that he must have a care
of his wife too, for she hath now the gallant: and they say the King
himself did once ask Montagu how his mistress (meaning the Queene) did.
He grew so proud, and despised every body, besides suffering nobody, he
or she, to get or do any thing about the Queene, that they all laboured
to do him a good turn. They also say that he did give some affront to
the Duke of Monmouth, which the King himself did speak to him of. But
strange it is that this man should, from the greatest negligence in the
world, come to be the miracle of attendance, so as to take all offices
from everybody, either men or women, about the Queene. Insomuch that he
was observed as a miracle, but that which is the worst, that which in
a wise manner performed [would] turn to his greatest advantage, was by
being so observed employed to his greatest wrong, the world concluding
that there must be something more than ordinary to cause him to do this.
So he is gone, nobody pitying but laughing at him; and he pretends only
that he is gone to his father, that is sick in the country. By and by
comes Povy, Creed, and Vernatty, and so to their accounts, wherein more
trouble and vexation with Povy. That being done, I sent them going and
myself fell to business till dinner. So home to dinner very pleasant.
In the afternoon to my office, where busy again, and by and by came a
letter from my father so full of trouble for discontents there between
my mother and servants, and such troubles to my father from hence from
Cave that hath my brother’s bastard that I know not what in the world to
do, but with great trouble, it growing night, spent some time walking,
and putting care as much as I could out of my head, with my wife in the
garden, and so home to supper and to bed.