25th. Up, and with Sir W. Pen by coach to St. James’s and there up to
the Duke, and after he was ready to his closet, where most of our talke
about a Dutch warr, and discoursing of things indeed now for it. The
Duke, which gives me great good hopes, do talk of setting up a good
discipline in the fleete. In the Duke’s chamber there is a bird, given
him by Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, comes from the East Indys, black the
greatest part, with the finest collar of white about the neck; but talks
many things and neyes like the horse, and other things, the best almost
that ever I heard bird in my life. Thence down with Mr. Coventry and Sir
W. Rider, who was there (going along with us from the East Indya house
to-day) to discourse of my Lord Peterborough’s accounts, and then walked
over the Parke, and in Mr. Cutler’s coach with him and Rider as far
as the Strand, and thence I walked to my Lord Sandwich’s, where by
agreement I met my wife, and there dined with the young ladies; my Lady,
being not well, kept her chamber. Much simple discourse at table among
the young ladies. After dinner walked in the garden, talking, with Mr.
Moore about my Lord’s business. He told me my Lord runs in debt every
day more and more, and takes little care how to come out of it. He
counted to me how my Lord pays use now for above L9000, which is a sad
thing, especially considering the probability of his going to sea, in
great danger of his life, and his children, many of them, to provide
for. Thence, the young ladies going out to visit, I took my wife by
coach out through the city, discoursing how to spend the afternoon; and
conquered, with much ado, a desire of going to a play; but took her out
at White Chapel, and to Bednal Green; so to Hackney, where I have
not been many a year, since a little child I boarded there. Thence to
Kingsland, by my nurse’s house, Goody Lawrence, where my brother Tom and
I was kept when young. Then to Newington Green, and saw the outside of
Mrs. Herbert’s house, where she lived, and my Aunt Ellen with her;
but, Lord! how in every point I find myself to over-value things when
a child. Thence to Islington, and so to St. John’s to the Red Bull,
and there: saw the latter part of a rude prize fought, but with good
pleasure enough; and thence back to Islington, and at the King’s Head,
where Pitts lived, we ‘light and eat and drunk for remembrance of the
old house sake, and so through Kingsland again, and so to Bishopsgate,
and so home with great pleasure. The country mighty pleasant, and we
with great content home, and after supper to bed, only a little troubled
at the young ladies leaving my wife so to-day, and from some passages
fearing my Lady might be offended. But I hope the best.