4th. Up betimes, and my wife being ready, and her mayd Besse and the
girl, I carried them by coach and set them all down in Covent Garden and
there left them, and I to my Lord Sandwich’s lodgings, but he not being
up, I to the Duke’s chamber, and there by and by to his closett, where
since his lady was ill, a little red bed of velvet is brought for him to
lie alone, which is a very pretty one. After doing business here, I
to my Lord’s again, and there spoke with him, and he seems now almost
friends again as he used to be. Here meeting Mr. Pierce, the chyrurgeon,
he told me among other Court newes, how the Queene is very well again,
and the King lay with her on Saturday night last; and that she speaks
now very pretty English, and makes her sense out now and then with
pretty phrazes: as among others this is mightily cried up; that, meaning
to say that she did not like such a horse so well as the rest, he being
too prancing and full of tricks, she said he did make too much
vanity. Thence to the Tennis Court, after I had spent a little time in
Westminster Hall, thinking to have met with Mrs. Lane, but I could not
and am glad of it, and there saw the King play at Tennis and others: but
to see how the King’s play was extolled without any cause at all, was
a loathsome sight, though sometimes, indeed, he did play very well and
deserved to be commended; but such open flattery is beastly. Afterwards
to St. James’s Parke, being unwilling to go to spend money at the
ordinary, and there spent an hour or two, it being a pleasant day,
seeing people play at Pell Mell; where it pleased me mightily to hear
a gallant, lately come from France, swear at one of his companions for
suffering his man (a spruce blade) to be so saucy as to strike a ball
while his master was playing on the Mall.

     [When Egerton was Bishop of Durham, he often played at bowls with
     his guests on the public days.  On an occasion of this sort, a
     visitor happening to cross the lawn, one of the chaplains exclaimed,
     “You must not shake the green, for the bishop is going to bowl.”--B.]

Thence took coach at White Hall and took up my wife, who is mighty sad
to think of her father, who is going into Germany against the Turkes;
but what will become of her brother I know not. He is so idle, and out
of all capacity, I think, to earn his bread. Home and at my office till
is at night making my solemn vowes for the next year, which I trust in
the Lord I shall keep, but I fear I have a little too severely bound
myself in some things and in too many, for I fear I may forget some. But
however, I know the worst, and shall by the blessing of God observe to
perform or pay my forfeits punctually. So home and to bed with my mind
at rest.