8th. Up and all the morning at my office and with Sir J. Minnes,
directing him and Mr. Turner about keeping of their books according to
yesterday’s work, wherein I shall make them work enough. At noon to the
‘Change, and there long, and from thence by appointment took Luellin,
Mount, and W. Symons, and Mr. Pierce, the chirurgeon, home to dinner
with me and were merry. But, Lord! to hear how W. Symons do commend and
look sadly and then talk bawdily and merrily, though his wife was dead
but the other day, would make a dogg laugh. After dinner I did go in
further part of kindness to Luellin for his kindness about Deering’s L50
which he procured me the other day of him. We spent all the afternoon
together and then they to cards with my wife, who this day put on her
Indian blue gowne which is very pretty, where I left them for an hour,
and to my office, and then to them again, and by and by they went
away at night, and so I again to my office to perfect a letter to Mr.
Coventry about Department Treasurers, wherein I please myself and hope
to give him content and do the King service therein. So having done, I
home and to teach my wife a new lesson in the globes, and to supper,
and to bed. We had great pleasure this afternoon; among other things, to
talk of our old passages together in Cromwell’s time; and how W. Symons
did make me laugh and wonder to-day when he told me how he had
made shift to keep in, in good esteem and employment, through eight
governments in one year (the dear 1659, which were indeed, and he did
name them all), and then failed unhappy in the ninth, viz. that of the
King’s coming in. He made good to me the story which Luellin did tell
me the other day, of his wife upon her death-bed; how she dreamt of her
uncle Scobell, and did foretell, from some discourse she had with him,
that she should die four days thence, and not sooner, and did all along
say so, and did so. Upon the ‘Change a great talke there was of one Mr.
Tryan, an old man, a merchant in Lyme-Streete, robbed last night (his
man and mayde being gone out after he was a-bed), and gagged and robbed
of L1050 in money and about L4000 in jewells, which he had in his house
as security for money. It is believed by many circumstances that his man
is guilty of confederacy, by their ready going to his secret till in his
desk, wherein the key of his cash-chest lay.