5th. Up very betimes, and walked to my cozen Anthony Joyce’s, and thence
with him to his brother Will, in Tuttle Street, where I find him pretty
cheery over [what] he was yesterday (like a coxcomb), his wife being
come to him, and having had his boy with him last night. Here I staid
an hour or two and wrote over a fresh petition, that which was drawn by
their solicitor not pleasing me, and thence to the Painted chamber, and
by and by away by coach to my Lord Peterborough’s, and there delivered
the petition into his hand, which he promised most readily to deliver to
the House today. Thence back, and there spoke to several Lords, and
so did his solicitor (one that W. Joyce hath promised L5 to if he be
released). Lord Peterborough presented a petition to the House from
W. Joyce: and a great dispute, we hear, there was in the House for and
against it. At last it was carried that he should be bayled till the
House meets again after Easter, he giving bond for his appearance. This
was not so good as we hoped, but as good as we could well expect. Anon
comes the King and passed the Bill for repealing the Triennial Act, and
another about Writs of Errour. I crowded in and heard the King’s speech
to them; but he speaks the worst that ever I heard man in my life worse
than if he read it all, and he had it in writing in his hand. Thence,
after the House was up, and I inquired what the order of the House was,
I to W. Joyce,’ with his brother, and told them all. Here was Kate come,
and is a comely fat woman. I would not stay dinner, thinking to go home
to dinner, and did go by water as far as the bridge, but thinking that
they would take it kindly my being there, to be bayled for him if there
was need, I returned, but finding them gone out to look after it, only
Will and his wife and sister left and some friends that came to visit
him, I to Westminster Hall, and by and by by agreement to Mrs. Lane’s
lodging, whither I sent for a lobster, and with Mr. Swayne and his wife
eat it, and argued before them mightily for Hawly, but all would not do,
although I made her angry by calling her old, and making her know what
herself is. Her body was out of temper for any dalliance, and so after
staying there 3 or 4 hours, but yet taking care to have my oath safe of
not staying a quarter of an hour together with her, I went to W. Joyce,
where I find the order come, and bayle (his father and brother) given;
and he paying his fees, which come to above L2, besides L5 he is to give
one man, and his charges of eating and drinking here, and 10s. a-day
as many days as he stands under bayle: which, I hope, will teach him
hereafter to hold his tongue better than he used to do. Thence with
Anth. Joyce’s wife alone home talking of Will’s folly, and having set
her down, home myself, where I find my wife dressed as if she had been
abroad, but I think she was not, but she answering me some way that
I did not like I pulled her by the nose, indeed to offend her, though
afterwards to appease her I denied it, but only it was done in haste.
The poor wretch took it mighty ill, and I believe besides wringing her
nose she did feel pain, and so cried a great while, but by and by I made
her friends, and so after supper to my office a while, and then home to
bed. This day great numbers of merchants came to a Grand Committee of
the House to bring in their claims against the Dutch. I pray God guide
the issue to our good!