22nd. Up and betimes to my office, and then out to several places,
among others to Holborne to have spoke with one Mr. Underwood about some
English hemp, he lies against Gray’s Inn. Thereabouts I to a barber’s
shop to have my hair cut, and there met with a copy of verses, mightily
commended by some gentlemen there, of my Lord Mordaunt’s, in excuse
of his going to sea this late expedition, with the Duke of Yorke. But,
Lord! they are but sorry things; only a Lord made them. Thence to the
‘Change; and there, among the merchants, I hear fully the news of
our being beaten to dirt at Guinny, by De Ruyter with his fleete. The
particulars, as much as by Sir G. Carteret afterwards I heard, I have
said in a letter to my Lord Sandwich this day at Portsmouth; it being
most wholly to the utter ruine of our Royall Company, and reproach and
shame to the whole nation, as well as justification to them in their
doing wrong to no man as to his private [property], only takeing
whatever is found to belong to the Company, and nothing else. Dined at
the Dolphin, Sir G. Carteret, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and I, with
Sir W. Boreman and Sir Theophilus Biddulph and others, Commissioners of
the Sewers, about our place below to lay masts in. But coming a little
too soon, I out again, and tooke boat down to Redriffe; and just in
time within two minutes, and saw the new vessel of Sir William Petty’s
launched, the King and Duke being there.

     [Pepys was wrong as to the name of Sir William Petty’s new
     doublekeeled boat.  On February 13th, 1664-65, he gives the correct
     title, which was “The Experiment.”]

It swims and looks finely, and I believe will do well. The name I think
is Twilight, but I do not know certainly. Coming away back immediately
to dinner, where a great deal of good discourse, and Sir G. Carteret’s
discourse of this Guinny business, with great displeasure at the losse
of our honour there, and do now confess that the trade brought all these
troubles upon us between the Dutch and us. Thence to the office and
there sat late, then I to my office and there till 12 at night, and so
home to bed weary.