20th. Up, and a while to my office, and then home with Mr. Deane till
dinner, discoursing upon the business of my Lord Chancellor’s timber in
Clarendon Parke, and how to make a report therein without offending him;
which at last I drew up, and hope it will please him. But I would to
God neither I nor he ever had had any thing to have done with it! Dined
together with a good pig, and then out by coach to White Hall, to the
Committee for Fishing; but nothing done, it being a great day to-day
there upon drawing at the Lottery of Sir Arthur Slingsby. I got in and
stood by the two Queenes and the Duchesse of Yorke, and just behind my
Lady Castlemayne, whom I do heartily adore; and good sport it was to
see how most that did give their ten pounds did go away with a pair of
globes only for their lot, and one gentlewoman, one Mrs. Fish, with the
only blanke. And one I staid to see drew a suit of hangings valued at
L430, and they say are well worth the money, or near it. One other suit
there is better than that; but very many lots of three and fourscore
pounds. I observed the King and Queenes did get but as poor lots as any
else. But the wisest man I met with was Mr. Cholmley, who insured as
many as would, from drawing of the one blank for 12d.; in which case
there was the whole number of persons to one, which I think was three or
four hundred. And so he insured about 200 for 200 shillings, so that he
could not have lost if one of them had drawn it, for there was enough
to pay the L10; but it happened another drew it, and so he got all the
money he took. I left the lottery, and went to a play, only a piece of
it, which was the Duke’s house, “Worse and Worse;” just the same manner
of play, and writ, I believe, by the same man as “The Adventures of Five
Hours;” very pleasant it was, and I begin to admire Harris more than
ever. Thence to Westminster to see Creed, and he and I took a walk in
the Parke. He is ill, and not able yet to set out after my Lord, but
will do to-morrow. So home, and late at my office, and so home to bed.
This evening being moonshine I played a little late upon my flageolette
in the garden. But being at Westminster Hall I met with great news that
Mrs. Lane is married to one Martin, one that serves Captain Marsh. She
is gone abroad with him to-day, very fine. I must have a bout with her
very shortly to see how she finds marriage.