7th (Lord’s day). Lay long caressing my wife and talking, she telling me
sad stories of the ill, improvident, disquiett, and sluttish manner that
my father and mother and Pall live in the country, which troubles me
mightily, and I must seek to remedy it. So up and ready, and my wife
also, and then down and I showed my wife, to her great admiration and
joy, Mr. Gauden’s present of plate, the two flaggons, which indeed are
so noble that I hardly can think that they are yet mine. So blessing God
for it, we down to dinner mighty pleasant, and so up after dinner for a
while, and I then to White Hall, walked thither, having at home met with
a letter of Captain Cooke’s, with which he had sent a boy for me to see,
whom he did intend to recommend to me. I therefore went and there met
and spoke with him. He gives me great hopes of the boy, which pleases
me, and at Chappell I there met Mr. Blagrave, who gives a report of the
boy, and he showed me him, and I spoke to him, and the boy seems a good
willing boy to come to me, and I hope will do well. I am to speak to
Mr. Townsend to hasten his clothes for him, and then he is to come. So I
walked homeward and met with Mr. Spong, and he with me as far as the
Old Exchange talking of many ingenuous things, musique, and at last of
glasses, and I find him still the same ingenuous man that ever he was,
and do among other fine things tell me that by his microscope of his
owne making he do discover that the wings of a moth is made just as the
feathers of the wing of a bird, and that most plainly and certainly.
While we were talking came by several poor creatures carried by, by
constables, for being at a conventicle. They go like lambs, without any
resistance. I would to God they would either conform, or be more wise,
and not be catched! Thence parted with him, mightily pleased with his
company, and away homeward, calling at Dan Rawlinson, and supped there
with my uncle Wight, and then home and eat again for form sake with her,
and then to prayers and to bed.