21st. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, among other
things making a contract with Sir W. Warren for almost 1000 Gottenburg
masts, the biggest that ever was made in the Navy, and wholly of my
compassing and a good one I hope it is for the King. Dined at Sir W.
Batten’s, where I have not eat these many months. Sir G. Carteret, Mr.
Coventry, Sir J. Minnes, and myself there only, and my Lady. A good
venison pasty, and very merry, and pleasant I made myself with my
Lady, and she as much to me. This morning to the office comes Nicholas
Osborne, Mr. Gauden’s clerke, to desire of me what piece of plate I
would choose to have a L100, or thereabouts, bestowed upon me in, he
having order to lay out so much; and, out of his freedom with me, do
of himself come to make this question. I a great while urged my
unwillingnesse to take any, not knowing how I could serve Mr. Gauden,
but left it wholly to himself; so at noon I find brought home in fine
leather cases, a pair of the noblest flaggons that ever I saw all the
days of my life; whether I shall keepe them or no I cannot tell; for
it is to oblige me to him in the business of the Tangier victualling,
wherein I doubt I shall not; but glad I am to see that I shall be sure
to get something on one side or other, have it which will: so, with a
merry heart, I looked upon them, and locked them up. After dinner to
[give] my Lord Chancellor a good account of his business, and he is very
well pleased therewith, and carries himself with great discretion to me,
without seeming over glad or beholding to me; and yet I know that he do
think himself very well served by me. Thence to Westminster and to Mrs.
Lane’s lodgings, to give her joy, and there suffered me to deal with
her as I hoped to do, and by and by her husband comes, a sorry, simple
fellow, and his letter to her which she proudly showed me a simple,
nonsensical thing. A man of no discourse, and I fear married her to make
a prize of, which he is mistaken in, and a sad wife I believe she will
prove to him, for she urged me to appoint a time as soon as he is gone
out of town to give her a meeting next week. So by water with a couple
of cozens of Mrs. Lane’s, and set them down at Queenhive, and I through
Bridge home, and there late at business, and so home to supper and to
bed.