3rd. Up betimes and set some joyners on work to new lay my floor in our
wardrobe, which I intend to make a room for musique. Thence abroad to
Westminster, among other things to Mr. Blagrave’s, and there had his
consent for his kinswoman to come to be with my wife for her woman, at
which I am well pleased and hope she may do well. Thence to White Hall
to meet with Sir G. Carteret about hiring some ground to make our mast
docke at Deptford, but being Council morning failed, but met with Mr.
Coventry, and he and I discoursed of the likeliness of a Dutch warr,
which I think is very likely now, for the Dutch do prepare a fleet to
oppose us at Guinny, and he do think we shall, though neither of us have
a mind to it, fall into it of a sudden, and yet the plague do increase
among them, and is got into their fleet, and Opdam’s own ship, which
makes it strange they should be so high. Thence to the ‘Change, and
thence home to dinner, and down by water to Woolwich to the rope yard,
and there visited Mrs. Falconer, who tells me odd stories of how Sir W.
Pen was rewarded by her husband with a gold watch (but seems not certain
of what Sir W. Batten told me, of his daughter having a life given her
in L80 per ann.) for his helping him to his place, and yet cost him L150
to Mr. Coventry besides. He did much advise it seems Mr. Falconer not
to marry again, expressing that he would have him make his daughter his
heire, or words to that purpose, and that that makes him, she thinks, so
cold in giving her any satisfaction, and that W. Boddam hath publickly
said, since he came down thither to be clerke of the ropeyard, that it
hath this week cost him L100, and would be glad that it would cost him
but half as much more for the place, and that he was better before than
now, and that if he had been to have bought it, he would not have given
so much for it. Now I am sure that Mr. Coventry hath again and again
said that he would take nothing, but would give all his part in it
freely to him, that so the widow might have something. What the meaning
of this is I know not, but that Sir W. Pen do get something by
it. Thence to the Dockeyard, and there saw the new ship in great
forwardness. So home and to supper, and then to the office, where late,
Mr. Bland and I talking about Tangier business, and so home to bed.