18th. Up and to the office, where among other things we made a very
great contract with Sir W. Warren for 3,000 loade of timber. At noon
dined at home. In the afternoon to the Fishery, where, very confused and
very ridiculous, my Lord Craven’s proceedings, especially his finding
fault with Sir J. Collaton and Colonell Griffin’s’ report in the
accounts of the lottery-men. Thence I with Mr. Gray in his coach to
White Hall, but the King and Duke being abroad, we returned to Somersett
House. In discourse I find him a very worthy and studious gentleman in
the business of trade, and among-other things he observed well to me,
how it is not the greatest wits, but the steady man, that is a good
merchant: he instanced in Ford and Cocke, the last of whom he values
above all men as his oracle, as Mr. Coventry do Mr. Jolliffe. He says
that it is concluded among merchants, that where a trade hath once
been and do decay, it never recovers again, and therefore that the
manufacture of cloath of England will never come to esteem again; that,
among other faults, Sir Richard Ford cannot keepe a secret, and that it
is so much the part of a merchant to be guilty of that fault that the
Duke of Yoke is resolved to commit no more secrets to the merchants
of the Royall Company; that Sir Ellis Layton is, for a speech of forty
words, the wittiest man that ever he knew in his life, but longer he is
nothing, his judgment being nothing at all, but his wit most absolute.
At Somersett House he carried me in, and there I saw the Queene’s new
rooms, which are most stately and nobly furnished; and there I saw her,
and the Duke of Yorke and Duchesse were there. The Duke espied me, and
came to me, and talked with me a very great while about our contract
this day with Sir W. Warren, and among other things did with some
contempt ask whether we did except Polliards, which Sir W. Batten did
yesterday (in spite, as the Duke I believe by my Lord Barkely do well
enough know) among other things in writing propose. Thence home by
coach, it raining hard, and to my office, where late, then home to
supper and to bed. This night the Dutch Embassador desired and had an
audience of the King. What the issue of it was I know not. Both sides
I believe desire peace, but neither will begin, and so I believe a warr
will follow. The Prince is with his fleet at Portsmouth, and the Dutch
are making all preparations for warr.