13th. Up before three o’clock, and a little after upon the water, it
being very light as at noon, and a bright sunrising; but by and by a
rainbow appeared, the first that ever in a morning I saw, and then it
fell a-raining a little, but held up again, and I to Woolwich, where
before all the men came to work I with Mr. Deane spent two hours upon
the new ship, informing myself in the names and natures of many parts
of her to my great content, and so back again, without doing any thing
else, and after shifting myself away to Westminster, looking after
Mr. Maes’s business and others. In the Painted Chamber I heard a
fine conference between some of the two Houses upon the Bill for
Conventicles. The Lords would be freed from having their houses searched
by any but the Lord Lieutenant of the County; and upon being found
guilty, to be tried only by their peers; and thirdly, would have it
added, that whereas the Bill says, “That that, among other things,
shall be a conventicle wherein any such meeting is found doing any thing
contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of England,” they would have it
added, “or practice.” The Commons to the Lords said, that they knew not
what might hereafter be found out which might be called the practice of
the Church of England; for there are many things may be said to be the
practice of the Church, which were never established by any law, either
common, statute, or canon; as singing of psalms, binding up prayers at
the end of the Bible, and praying extempore before and after sermon:
and though these are things indifferent, yet things for aught they at
present know may be started, which may be said to be the practice of the
Church which would not be fit to allow. For the Lords’ priviledges,
Mr. Walter told them how tender their predecessors had been of the
priviledges of the Lords; but, however, where the peace of the kingdom
stands in competition with them, they apprehend those priviledges must
give place. He told them that he thought, if they should owne all to be
the priviledges of the Lords which might be demanded, they should be led
like the man (who granted leave to his neighbour to pull off his horse’s
tail, meaning that he could not do it at once) that hair by hair had his
horse’s tail pulled off indeed: so the Commons, by granting one thing
after another, might be so served by the Lords. Mr. Vaughan, whom I
could not to my grief perfectly hear, did say, if that they should be
obliged in this manner to, exempt the Lords from every thing, it would
in time come to pass that whatever (be [it] never so great) should be
voted by the Commons as a thing penall for a commoner, the contrary
should be thought a priviledge to the Lords: that also in this business,
the work of a conventicle being but the work of an hour, the cause of
a search would be over before a Lord Lieutenant, who may be many miles
off, can be sent for; and that all this dispute is but about L100; for
it is said in the Act, that it shall be banishment or payment of L100.
I thereupon heard the Duke of Lenox say, that there might be Lords who
could not always be ready to lose L100, or some such thing: They broke
up without coming to any end in it. There was also in the Commons’ House
a great quarrel about Mr. Prin, and it was believed that he should have
been sent to the Towre, for adding something to a Bill (after it was
ordered to be engrossed) of his own head--a Bill for measures for wine
and other things of that sort, and a Bill of his owne bringing in; but
it appeared he could not mean any hurt in it. But, however, the King was
fain to write in his behalf, and all was passed over. But it is worth my
remembrance, that I saw old Ryly the Herald, and his son; and spoke to
his son, who told me in very bad words concerning Mr. Prin, that the
King had given him an office of keeping the Records; but that he never
comes thither, nor had been there these six months: so that I perceive
they expect to get his imployment from him. Thus every body is liable to
be envied and supplanted. At noon over to the Leg, where Sir G. Ascue,
Sir Robt. Parkhurst and Sir W. Pen dined. A good dinner and merry.
Thence to White Hall walking up and down a great while, but the Council
not meeting soon enough I went homeward, calling upon my cozen Roger
Pepys, with whom I talked and heard so much from him of his desire that
I would see my brother’s debts paid, and things still of that nature
tending to my parting with what I get with pain to serve others’
expenses that I was cruelly vexed. Thence to Sir R. Bernard, and there
heard something of Pigott’s delay of paying our money, that that also
vexed me mightily. So home and there met with a letter from my cozen
Scott, which tells me that he is resolved to meddle no more with our
business, of administering for my father, which altogether makes me
almost distracted to think of the trouble that I am like to meet with by
other folks’ business more than ever I hope to have by my owne. So with
great trouble of mind to bed.