23rd. Up and to my office, then come by appointment cozen Tom Trice to
me, and I paid him the L20 remaining due to him upon the bond of L100
given him by agreement November, 1663, to end the difference between us
about my aunt’s, his mother’s, money. And here, being willing to know
the worst, I told him, “I hope now there is nothing remaining between
you and I of future dispute.” “No,” says he, “nothing at all that I know
of, but only a small matter of about 20 or 30s. that my father Pepys
received for me of rent due to me in the country, which I will in a day
or two bring you an account of,” and so we parted. Dined at home upon
a good turkey which Mr. Sheply sent us, then to the office all the
afternoon, Mr. Cutler and others coming to me about business. I
hear that the Dutch have prepared a fleete to go the backway to the
Streights, where without doubt they will master our fleete. This put
to that of Guinny makes me fear them mightily, and certainly they are
a most wise people, and careful of their business. The King of France,
they say, do declare himself obliged to defend them, and lays claim by
his Embassador to the wines we have taken from the Dutch Bourdeaux men,
and more, it is doubted whether the Swede will be our friend or no. Pray
God deliver us out of these troubles! This day Sir W. Batten sent and
afterwards spoke to me, to have me and my wife come and dine with them
on Monday next: which is a mighty condescension in them, and for some
great reason I am sure, or else it pleases God by my late care of
business to make me more considerable even with them than I am sure they
would willingly owne me to be. God make me thankfull and carefull to
preserve myself so, for I am sure they hate me and it is hope or fear
that makes them flatter me. It being a bright night, which it has not
been a great while, I purpose to endeavour to be called in the morning
to see the Comet, though I fear we shall not see it, because it rises in
the east but 16 degrees, and then the houses will hinder us.