17th. Up, and with my wife, setting her down by her father’s in Long
Acre, in so ill looked a place, among all the whore houses, that I was
troubled at it, to see her go thither. Thence I to White Hall and there
walked up and down talking with Mr. Pierce, who tells me of the King’s
giving of my Lord Fitz-Harding two leases which belong indeed to the
Queene, worth L20,000 to him; and how people do talk of it, and other
things of that nature which I am sorry to hear. He and I walked round
the Park with great pleasure, and back again, and finding no time to
speak with my Lord of Albemarle, I walked to the ‘Change and there met
my wife at our pretty Doll’s, and so took her home, and Creed also whom
I met there, and sent her hose, while Creed and I staid on the ‘Change,
and by and by home and dined, where I found an excellent mastiffe, his
name Towser, sent me by a chyrurgeon. After dinner I took my wife again
by coach (leaving Creed by the way going to Gresham College, of which he
is now become one of the virtuosos) and to White Hall, where I delivered
a paper about Tangier to my Lord Duke of Albemarle in the council
chamber, and so to Mrs. Hunt’s to call my wife, and so by coach straight
home, and at my office till 3 o’clock in the morning, having spent much
time this evening in discourse with Mr. Cutler, who tells me how the
Dutch deal with us abroad and do not value us any where, and how he
and Sir W. Rider have found reason to lay aside Captain Cocke in their
company, he having played some indiscreet and unfair tricks with them,
and has lost himself every where by his imposing upon all the world with
the conceit he has of his own wit, and so has, he tells me, Sir R. Ford
also, both of whom are very witty men. He being gone Sir W. Rider came
and staid with me till about 12 at night, having found ourselves work
till that time, about understanding the measuring of Mr. Wood’s masts,
which though I did so well before as to be thought to deal very hardly
against Wood, yet I am ashamed I understand it no better, and do hope
yet, whatever be thought of me, to save the King some more money,
and out of an impatience to breake up with my head full of confused
confounded notions, but nothing brought to a clear comprehension, I was
resolved to sit up and did till now it is ready to strike 4 o’clock, all
alone, cold, and my candle not enough left to light me to my owne house,
and so, with my business however brought to some good understanding, and
set it down pretty clear, I went home to bed with my mind at good quiet,
and the girl sitting up for me (the rest all a-bed). I eat and drank a
little, and to bed, weary, sleepy, cold, and my head akeing.