26th. Up, and to my Lord Sandwich’s, and coming a little too early, I
went and saw W. Joyce, and by and by comes in Anthony, they both owning
a great deal of kindness received from me in their late business, and
indeed I did what I could, and yet less I could not do. It has cost the
poor man above L40; besides, he is likely to lose his debt. Thence to my
Lord’s, and by and by he comes down, and with him (Creed with us) I rode
in his coach to St. James’s, talking about W. Joyce’s business mighty
merry, and my Lady Peters, he says, is a drunken jade, he himself having
seen her drunk in the lobby of their House. I went up with him to the
Duke, where methought the Duke did not shew him any so great fondness as
he was wont; and methought my Lord was not pleased that I should see the
Duke made no more of him, not that I know any thing of any unkindnesse,
but I think verily he is not as he was with him in his esteem. By and
by the Duke went out and we with him through the Parke, and there I left
him going into White Hall, and Creed and I walked round the Parke,
a pleasant walk, observing the birds, which is very pleasant; and so
walked to the New Exchange, and there had a most delicate dish of curds
and creame, and discourse with the good woman of the house, a discreet
well-bred woman, and a place with great delight I shall make it now and
then to go thither. Thence up, and after a turn or two in the ‘Change,
home to the Old Exchange by coach, where great newes and true, I saw by
written letters, of strange fires seen at Amsterdam in the ayre, and not
only there, but in other places thereabout. The talke of a Dutch warr
is not so hot, but yet I fear it will come to it at last. So home and
to the office, where we sat late. My wife gone this afternoon to
the buriall of my she-cozen Scott, a good woman; and it is a sad
consideration how the Pepys’s decay, and nobody almost that I know in a
present way of encreasing them. At night late at my office, and so home
to my wife to supper and to bed.