29th. Up, and after shaving myself (wherein twice now, one after
another, I have cut myself much, but I think it is from the bluntness of
the razor) there came Mr. Deane to me and staid with me a while talking
about masts, wherein he prepared me in several things against Mr. Wood,
and also about Sir W. Petty’s boat, which he says must needs prove a
folly, though I do not think so unless it be that the King will not have
it encouraged. At noon, by appointment, comes Mr. Hartlibb and his wife,
and a little before them Messrs. Langley and Bostocke (old acquaintances
of mine at Westminster, clerks), and after shewing them my house and
drinking they set out by water, my wife and I with them down to Wapping
on board the “Crowne,” a merchantman, Captain Floyd, a civil person.
Here was Vice-Admiral Goodson, whom the more I know the more I value for
a serious man and staunch. Here was Whistler the flagmaker, which vexed
me, but it mattered not. Here was other sorry company and the discourse
poor, so that we had no pleasure there at all, but only to see and bless
God to find the difference that is now between our condition and that
heretofore, when we were not only much below Hartlibb in all respects,
but even these two fellows above named, of whom I am now quite ashamed
that ever my education should lead me to such low company, but it is
God’s goodness only, for which let him be praised. After dinner I.
broke up and with my wife home, and thence to the Fleece in Cornhill,
by appointment, to meet my Lord Marlborough, a serious and worthy
gentleman, who, after doing our business, about the company, he and they
began to talk of the state of the Dutch in India, which is like to be
in a little time without any controll; for we are lost there, and the
Portuguese as bad. Thence to the Coffee-house, where good discourse,
specially of Lt.-Coll. Baron touching the manners of the Turkes’
Government, among whom he lived long. So to my uncle Wight’s, where late
playing at cards, and so home.