27th. Up and to the office, and at noon to the Coffeehouse, where I sat
with Sir G. Ascue

     [Sir George Ayscue or Askew.  After his return from his imprisonment
     he declined to go to sea again, although he was twice afterwards
     formally appointed.  He sat on the court-martial on the loss of the
     “Defiance” in 1668.]

and Sir William Petty, who in discourse is, methinks, one of the most
rational men that ever I heard speak with a tongue, having all his
notions the most distinct and clear, and, among other things (saying,
that in all his life these three books were the most esteemed and
generally cried up for wit in the world “Religio Medici,” “Osborne’s
Advice to a Son,”

     [Francis Osborne, an English writer of considerable abilities and
     popularity, was the author of “Advice to a Son,” in two parts,
     Oxford, 1656-8, 8vo.  He died in 1659.  He is the same person
     mentioned as “My Father Osborne,” October 19th, 1661.--B.]

and “Hudibras “), did say that in these--in the two first
principally--the wit lies, and confirming some pretty sayings, which are
generally like paradoxes, by some argument smartly and pleasantly urged,
which takes with people who do not trouble themselves to examine the
force of an argument, which pleases them in the delivery, upon a subject
which they like; whereas, as by many particular instances of mine, and
others, out of Osborne, he did really find fault and weaken the strength
of many of Osborne’s arguments, so as that in downright disputation
they would not bear weight; at least, so far, but that they might be
weakened, and better found in their rooms to confirm what is there said.
He shewed finely whence it happens that good writers are not admired
by the present age; because there are but few in any age that do mind
anything that is abstruse and curious; and so longer before any body do
put the true praise, and set it on foot in the world, the generality
of mankind pleasing themselves in the easy delights of the world, as
eating, drinking, dancing, hunting, fencing, which we see the meanest
men do the best, those that profess it. A gentleman never dances so well
as the dancing master, and an ordinary fiddler makes better musique for
a shilling than a gentleman will do after spending forty, and so in all
the delights of the world almost. Thence to the ‘Change, and after doing
much business, home, taking Commissioner Pett with me, and all alone
dined together. He told me many stories of the yard, but I do know him
so well, and had his character given me this morning by Hempson, as well
as my own too of him before, that I shall know how to value any thing he
says either of friendship or other business. He was mighty serious with
me in discourse about the consequence of Sir W. Petty’s boat, as
the most dangerous thing in the world, if it should be practised by
endangering our losse of the command of the seas and our trade, while
the Turkes and others shall get the use of them, which, without doubt,
by bearing more sayle will go faster than any other ships, and, not
being of burden, our merchants cannot have the use of them and so will
be at the mercy of their enemies. So that I perceive he is afeard that
the honour of his trade will down, though (which is a truth) he pretends
this consideration to hinder the growth of this invention. He being gone
my wife and I took coach and to Covent Garden, to buy a maske at the
French House, Madame Charett’s, for my wife; in the way observing the
streete full of coaches at the new play, “The Indian Queene;” which for
show, they say, exceeds “Henry the Eighth.” Thence back to Mrs. Turner’s
and sat a while with them talking of plays and I know not what, and
so called to see Tom, but not at home, though they say he is in a deep
consumption, and Mrs. Turner and Dike and they say he will not live two
months to an end. So home and to the office, and then to supper and to
bed.