4th. Up, my eye being pretty well, and then by coach to my Lord
Sandwich, with whom I spoke, walking a good while with him in
his garden, which and the house is very fine, talking of my Lord
Peterborough’s accounts, wherein he is concerned both for the foolery
as also inconvenience which may happen upon my Lord Peterborough’s
ill-stating of his matters, so as to have his gaine discovered
unnecessarily. We did talk long and freely that I hope the worst is past
and all will be well. There were several people by trying a new-fashion
gun

     [Many attempts to produce a satisfactory revolver were made in
     former centuries, but it was not till the present one that Colt’s
     revolver was invented.  On February 18th, 1661, Edward, Marquis of
     Worcester, obtained Letters Patent for “an invencon to make certeyne
     guns or pistolls which in the tenth parte of one minute of an houre
     may, with a flaske contrived to that purpose, be re-charged the
     fourth part of one turne of the barrell which remaines still fixt,
     fastening it as forceably and effectually as a dozen thrids of any
     scrue, which in the ordinary and usual way require as many turnes.”
      On March 3rd, 1664, Abraham Hill obtained Letters Patent for a “gun
     or pistoll for small shott, carrying seaven or eight charges of the
     same in the stocke of the gun.”]

brought my Lord this morning, to shoot off often, one after another,
without trouble or danger, very pretty. Thence to the Temple, and there
taking White’s boat down to Woolwich, taking Mr. Shish at Deptford in
my way, with whom I had some good discourse of the Navy business. At
Woolwich discoursed with him and Mr. Pett about iron worke and other
businesses, and then walked home, and at Greenwich did observe the
foundation laying of a very great house for the King, which will cost a
great deale of money.

     [Building by John Webb; now a part of Greenwich Hospital.  Evelyn
     wrote in his Diary, October 19th, 1661: “I went to London to visite
     my Lord of Bristoll, having been with Sir John Denham (his Mates
     surveyor) to consult with him about the placing of his palace at
     Greenwich, which I would have had built between the river and the
     Queene’s house, so as a large cutt should have let in ye Thames like
     a bay; but Sir John was for setting it in piles at the very brink of
     the water, which I did not assent to and so came away, knowing Sir
     John to be a better poet than architect, tho’ he had Mr. Webb (Inigo
     Jones’s man) to assist him.”]

So home to dinner, and my uncle Wight coming in he along with my wife
and I by coach, and setting him down by the way going to Mr. Maes we
two to my Lord Sandwich’s to visit my Lady, with whom I left my wife
discoursing, and I to White Hall, and there being met by the Duke of
Yorke, he called me to him and discoursed a pretty while with me about
the new ship’s dispatch building at Woolwich, and talking of the charge
did say that he finds always the best the most cheape, instancing in
French guns, which in France you may buy for 4 pistoles, as good to look
to as others of 16, but not the service. I never had so much discourse
with the Duke before, and till now did ever fear to meet him. He found
me and Mr. Prin together talking of the Chest money, which we are to
blame not to look after. Thence to my Lord’s, and took up my wife, whom
my Lady hath received with her old good nature and kindnesse, and so
homewards, and she home, I ‘lighting by the way, and upon the ‘Change
met my uncle Wight and told him my discourse this afternoon with Sir G.
Carteret in Maes’ business, but much to his discomfort, and after a dish
of coffee home, and at my office a good while with Sir W. Warren talking
with great pleasure of many businesses, and then home to supper, my wife
and I had a good fowle to supper, and then I to the office again and so
home, my mind in great ease to think of our coming to so good a respect
with my Lord again, and my Lady, and that my Lady do so much cry up
my father’s usage of her children, and the goodness of the ayre there,
found in the young ladies’ faces at their return thence, as she says, as
also my being put into the commission of the Fishery,

     [There had been recently established, under the Great Seal of
     England, a Corporation for the Royal Fishing, of which the Duke of
     York was Governor, Lord Craven Deputy-Governor, and the Lord Mayor
     and Chamberlain of London, for the time being, Treasurers, in which
     body was vested the sole power of licensing lotteries (“The Newes,”