2nd. Up, my eye mightily out of order with the rheum that is fallen
down into it, however, I by coach endeavoured to have waited on my Lord
Sandwich, but meeting him in Chancery Lane going towards the City
I stopped and so fairly walked home again, calling at St. Paul’s
Churchyarde, and there looked upon a pretty burlesque poem, called
“Scarronides, or Virgile Travesty;” extraordinary good. At home to the
office till dinner, and after dinner my wife cut my hair short, which
is growne pretty long again, and then to the office, and there till 9
at night doing business. This afternoon we had a good present of tongues
and bacon from Mr. Shales, of Portsmouth. So at night home to supper,
and, being troubled with my eye, to bed. This morning Mr. Burgby, one of
the writing clerks belonging to the Council, was with me about business,
a knowing man, he complains how most of the Lords of the Council do look
after themselves and their own ends, and none the publique, unless Sir
Edward Nicholas. Sir G. Carteret is diligent, but all for his own ends
and profit. My Lord Privy Scale, a destroyer of every body’s business,
and do no good at all to the publique. The Archbishop of Canterbury
speaks very little, nor do much, being now come to the highest pitch
that he can expect. He tells me, he believes that things will go very
high against the Chancellor by Digby, and that bad things will be
proved. Talks much of his neglecting the King; and making the King to
trot every day to him, when he is well enough to go to visit his cozen
Chief-Justice Hide, but not to the Council or King. He commends my Lord
of Ormond mightily in Ireland; but cries out cruelly of Sir G. Lane for
his corruption; and that he hath done my Lord great dishonour by selling
of places here, which are now all taken away, and the poor wretches
ready to starve. That nobody almost understands or judges of business
better than the King, if he would not be guilty of his father’s fault
to be doubtfull of himself, and easily be removed from his own opinion.
That my Lord Lauderdale is never from the King’s care nor council, and
that he is a most cunning fellow. Upon the whole, that he finds things
go very bad every where; and even in the Council nobody minds the
publique.