August 1st. Up, my mind very light from my last night’s accounts, and so
up and with Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Batten, and Sir W. Pen to St. James’s,
where among other things having prepared with some industry every man a
part this morning and no sooner (for fear they should either consider of
it or discourse of it one to another) Mr. Coventry did move the Duke and
obtain it that one of the clerkes of the Clerke of the Acts should have
an addition of L30 a year, as Mr. Turner hath, which I am glad of, that
I may give T. Hater L20 and keep L10 towards a boy’s keeping. Thence Mr.
Coventry and I to the Attorney’s chamber at the Temple, but not being
there we parted, and I home, and there with great joy told T. Hater what
I had done, with which the poor wretch was very glad, though his modesty
would not suffer him to say much. So to the Coffee-house, and there all
the house full of the victory Generall Soushe

     [General Soushe was Louis Ratuit, Comte de Souches.  The battle was
     fought at Lewenz (or Leva), in Hungary.--B.]

(who is a Frenchman, a soldier of fortune, commanding part of the German
army) hath had against the Turke; killing 4,000 men, and taking most
extraordinary spoil. Thence taking up Harman and his wife, carried them
to Anthony Joyce’s, where we had my venison in a pasty well done; but,
Lord! to see how much they made of, it, as if they had never eat any
before, and very merry we were, but Will most troublesomely so, and I
find he and his wife have a most wretched life one with another, but we
took no notice, but were very merry as I could be in such company. But
Mrs. Harman is a very pretty-humoured wretch, whom I could love with all
my heart, being so good and innocent company. Thence to Westminster to
Mr. Blagrave’s, and there, after singing a thing or two over, I spoke to
him about a woman for my wife, and he offered me his kinswoman, which I
was glad of, but she is not at present well, but however I hope to have
her. Thence to my Lord Chancellor’s, and thence with Mr. Coventry, who
appointed to meet me there, and with him to the Attorney General, and
there with Sir Ph. Warwicke consulted of a new commission to be had
through the Broad Seale to enable us to make this contract for Tangier
victualling. So home, and there talked long with Will about the young
woman of his family which he spoke of for to live with my wife, but
though she hath very many good qualitys, yet being a neighbour’s child
and young and not very staid, I dare not venture of having her, because
of her being able to spread any report of our family upon any discontent
among the heart of our neighbours. So that my dependance is upon Mr.
Blagrave, and so home to supper and to bed. Last night, at 12 o’clock,
I was waked with knocking at Sir W. Pen’s door; and what was it but
people’s running up and down to bring him word that his brother,

     [George Penn, the elder brother of Sir W. Penn, was a wealthy
     merchant at San Lucar, the port of Seville.  He was seized as a
     heretic by the Holy Office, and cast into a dungeon eight feet
     square and dark as the grave.  There he remained three years, every
     month being scourged to make him confess his crimes.  At last, after
     being twice put to the rack, he offered to confess whatever they
     would suggest.  His property, L12,000, was then confiscated, his
     wife, a Catholic, taken from him, and he was banished from Spain for
     ever.--M. B.]

who hath been a good while, it seems, sicke, is dead.