8th. Up, and by coach called upon Mr. Phillips, and after a little talk
with him away to my Lord Sandwich’s, but he being gone abroad, I staid a
little and talked with Mr. Howe, and so to Westminster in term time,
and there met Mr. Pierce, who told me largely how the King still do doat
upon his women, even beyond all shame; and that the good Queen will of
herself stop before she goes sometimes into her dressing-room, till
she knows whether the King be there, for fear he should be, as she hath
sometimes taken him, with Mrs. Stewart; and that some of the best parts
of the Queen’s joynture are, contrary to faith, and against the opinion
of my Lord Treasurer and his Council, bestowed or rented, I know not
how, to my Lord Fitz-Harding and Mrs. Stewart, and others of that crew
that the King do doat infinitely upon the Duke of Monmouth, apparently
as one that he intends to have succeed him. God knows what will be the
end of it! After he was gone I went and talked with Mrs. Lane about
persuading her to Hawly, and think she will come on, which I wish were
done, and so to Mr. Howlett and his wife, and talked about the same, and
they are mightily for it, and I bid them promote it, for I think it will
be for both their goods and my content. But I was much pleased to look
upon their pretty daughter, which is grown a pretty mayd, and will make
a fine modest woman. Thence to the ‘Change by coach, and after some
business done, home to dinner, and thence to Guildhall, thinking to have
heard some pleading, but there were no Courts, and so to Cade’s, the
stationer, and there did look upon some pictures which he promised to
give me the buying of, but I found he would have played the Jacke with
me, but at last he did proffer me what I expected, and I have laid aside
L10 or L12 worth, and will think of it, but I am loth to lay out so much
money upon them. So home a little vexed in my mind to think how to-day
I was forced to compliment W. Howe and admit myself to an equality with
Mr. Moore, which is come to challenge in his discourse with me, but I
will admit it no more, but let me stand or fall, I will show myself as
strange to them as my Lord do himself to me. After at the office till