6th. Up and found my wife very ill again, which troubles me, but I was
forced to go forth. So by water with Mr. Gauden and others to see a ship
hired by me for the Commissioners of Tangier, and to give order therein.
So back to the office, and by coach with Mr. Gauden to White Hall, and
there to my Lord Sandwich, and here I met Mr. Townsend very opportunely
and Captain Ferrer, and after some discourse we did accommodate the
business of the Wardrobe place, that he shall have the reversion if he
will take it out by giving a covenant that if Mr. Young’ dyes before my
father my father shall have the benefit of it for his life. So home, and
thence by water to Deptford, and there found our Trinity Brethren come
from their election to church, where Dr. Britton made, methought, an
indifferent sermon touching the decency that we ought to observe in
God’s house, the church, but yet to see how ridiculously some men will
carry themselves. Sir W. Batten did at open table anon in the name of
the whole Society desire him to print his sermon, as if the Doctor could
think that they were fit judges of a good sermon. Then by barge with Sir
W. Batten to Trinity House. It seems they have with much ado carried
it for Sir G. Carteret against Captain Harrison, poor man, who by
succession ought to have been it, and most hands were for him, but only
they were forced to fright the younger Brethren by requiring them to set
their hands (which is an ill course) and then Sir G. Carteret carryed
it. Here was at dinner my Lord Sandwich, Mr. Coventry, my Lord Craven,
and others. A great dinner, and good company. Mr. Prin also, who would
not drink any health, no, not the King’s, but sat down with his hat on
all the while;

     [William Prynne had published in 1628 a small book against the
     drinking of healths, entitled, “Healthes, Sicknesse; or a
     compendious and briefe Discourse, prouing, the Drinking and Pledging
     of Healthes to be sinfull and utterly unlawfull unto Christians
 ... wherein all those ordinary objections, excuses or pretences,
     which are made to justifie, extenuate, or excuse the drinking or
     pledging of Healthes are likewise cleared and answered.”  The
     pamphlet was dedicated to Charles I. as “more interessed in the
     theame and subject of this compendious discourse then any other that
     I know,” and “because your Majestie of all other persons within your
     owne dominions, are most dishonoured, prejudiced, and abused by
     these Healthes.”]

but nobody took notice of it to him at all; but in discourse with
the Doctor he did declare himself that he ever was, and has expressed
himself in all his books for mixt communion against the Presbyterian
examination. Thence after dinner by water, my Lord Sandwich and all
us Tangier men, where at the Committee busy till night with great
confusion, and then by coach home, with this content, however, that I
find myself every day become more and more known, and shall one day hope
to have benefit by it. I found my wife a little better. A little to my
office, then home to supper and to bed.