18th. Up and by coach to Westminster, and there solicited W. Joyce’s
business again; and did speake to the Duke of Yorke about it, who did
understand it very well. I afterwards did without the House fall in
company with my Lady Peters, and endeavoured to mollify her; but she
told me she would not, to redeem her from hell, do any thing to release
him; but would be revenged while she lived, if she lived the age of
Methusalem. I made many friends, and so did others. At last it was
ordered by the Lords that it should be referred to the Committee of
Privileges to consider. So I, after discoursing with the Joyces, away by
coach to the ‘Change; and there, among other things, do hear that a Jew
hath put in a policy of four per cent. to any man, to insure him against
a Dutch warr for four months; I could find in my heart to take him at
this offer, but however will advise first, and to that end took coach
to St. James’s, but Mr. Coventry was gone forth, and I thence to
Westminster Hall, where Mrs. Lane was gone forth, and so I missed of
my intent to be with her this afternoon, and therefore meeting Mr.
Blagrave, went home with him, and there he and his kinswoman sang, but
I was not pleased with it, they singing methought very ill, or else I
am grown worse to please than heretofore. Thence to the Hall again, and
after meeting with several persons, and talking there, I to Mrs. Hunt’s
(where I knew my wife and my aunt Wight were about business), and they
being gone to walk in the parke I went after them with Mrs. Hunt, who
staid at home for me, and finding them did by coach, which I had agreed
to wait for me, go with them all and Mrs. Hunt and a kinswoman of
theirs, Mrs. Steward, to Hide Parke, where I have not been since last
year; where I saw the King with his periwigg, but not altered at all;
and my Lady Castlemayne in a coach by herself, in yellow satin and a
pinner on; and many brave persons. And myself being in a hackney and
full of people, was ashamed to be seen by the world, many of them
knowing me. Thence in the evening home, setting my aunt at home, and
thence we sent for a joynt of meat to supper, and thence to the office
at 11 o’clock at night, and so home to bed.