18th. Up, and walked to my Lord’s, and there took my leave of him, he
seeming very friendly to me in as serious a manner as ever in his life,
and I believe he is very confident of me. He sets out this morning
for Deale. Thence to St. James’s to the Duke, and there did our usual
business. He discourses very freely of a warr with Holland, to begin
about winter, so that I believe we shall come to it. Before we went up
to the Duke, Sir G. Carteret and I did talk together in the Parke about
my Lord Chancellor’s business of the timber; he telling me freely that
my Lord Chancellor was never so angry with him in all his life, as he
was for this business, in great passion; and that when he saw me there,
he knew what it was about. And plots now with me how we may serve my
Lord, which I am mightily glad of; and I hope together we may do it.
Thence to Westminster to my barber’s, to have my Periwigg he lately made
me cleansed of its nits, which vexed me cruelly that he should put such
a thing into my hands. Here meeting his mayd Jane, that has lived with
them so long, I talked with her, and sending her of an errand to Dr.
Clerk’s, did meet her, and took her into a little alehouse in Brewers
Yard, and there did sport with her, without any knowledge of her though,
and a very pretty innocent girl she is. Thence to my Lord Chancellor’s,
but he being busy I went away to the ‘Change, and so home to dinner. By
and by comes Creed, and I out with him to Fleet Street, and he to Mr.
Povy’s, I to my Lord Chancellor’s, and missing him again walked to
Povy’s, and there saw his new perspective in his closet. Povy, to my
great surprise and wonder, did here attacque me in his own and Mr.
Bland’s behalf that I should do for them both for the new contractors
for the victualling of the garrison. Which I am ashamed that he should
ask of me, nor did I believe that he was a man that did seek benefit in
such poor things. Besides that he professed that he did not believe that
I would have any hand myself in the contract, and yet here declares that
he himself would have profit by it, and himself did move me that Sir W.
Rider might join, and Ford with Gauden. I told him I had no interest
in them, but I fear they must do something to him, for he told me that
those of the Mole did promise to consider him. Thence home and Creed
with me, and there he took occasion to owne his obligations to me, and
did lay down twenty pieces in gold upon my shelf in my closett, which
I did not refuse, but wish and expected should have been more. But,
however, this is better than nothing, and now I am out of expectation,
and shall henceforward know how to deal with him. After discourse of
settling his matters here, we went out by coach, and he ‘light at the
Temple, and there took final leave of me, in order to his following my
Lord to-morrow. I to my Lord Chancellor, and discoursed his business
with him. I perceive, and he says plainly, that he will not have any man
to have it in his power to say that my Lord Chancellor did contrive the
wronging the King of his timber; but yet I perceive, he would be glad to
have service done him therein; and told me Sir G. Carteret hath told him
that he and I would look after his business to see it done in the best
manner for him. Of this I was glad, and so away. Thence home, and late
with my Tangier men about drawing up their agreement with us, wherein I
find much trouble, and after doing as much as we could to-night, broke
up and I to bed.