July 1st. Up and within all the morning, first bringing down my Tryangle
to my chamber below, having a new frame made proper for it to stand on.
By and by comes Dr. Burnett, who assures me that I have an ulcer either
in the kidneys or bladder, for my water, which he saw yesterday, he is
sure the sediment is not slime gathered by heat, but is a direct pusse.
He did write me down some direction what to do for it, but not with the
satisfaction I expected.

                       Dr. Burnett’s advice to mee.

                 The Originall is fyled among my letters.

     Take of ye Rootes of Marsh-Mallows foure ounces, of Cumfry, of
     Liquorish, of each two ounces, of ye Mowers of St. John’s Wort two
     Handsfull, of ye Leaves of Plantan, of Alehoofe, of each three
     handfulls, of Selfeheale, of Red Roses, of each one Handfull, of
     Cynament, of Nutmegg, of each halfe an ounce.  Beate them well, then
     powre upon them one Quart of old Rhenish wine, and about Six houres
     after strayne it and clarify it with ye white of an Egge, and with a
     sufficient quantity of sugar, boyle it to ye consistence of a Syrrup
     and reserve it for use.

     Dissolve one spoonefull of this Syrrup in every draught of Ale or
     beere you drink.

     Morning and evening swallow ye quantity of an hazle-nutt of Cyprus
     Terebintine.

     If you are bound or have a fit of ye Stone eate an ounce of Cassia
     new drawne, from ye poynt of a knife.

     Old Canary or Malaga wine you may drinke to three or 4 glasses, but
     noe new wine, and what wine you drinke, lett it bee at meales.-[From
     a slip of paper inserted in the Diary at this place.]

I did give him a piece, with good hopes, however, that his advice will
be of use to me, though it is strange that Mr. Hollyard should never say
one word of this ulcer in all his life to me. He being gone, I to the
‘Change, and thence home to dinner, and so to my office, busy till
the evening, and then by agreement came Mr. Hill and Andrews and one
Cheswicke, a maister who plays very well upon the Spinette, and we sat
singing Psalms till 9 at night, and so broke up with great pleasure,
and very good company it is, and I hope I shall now and then have their
company. They being gone, I to my office till towards twelve o’clock,
and then home and to bed. Upon the ‘Change, this day, I saw how
uncertain the temper of the people is, that, from our discharging of
about 200 that lay idle, having nothing to do, upon some of our ships,
which were ordered to be fitted for service, and their works are now
done, the towne do talk that the King discharges all his men, 200
yesterday and 800 to-day, and that now he hath got L100,000 in his hand,
he values not a Dutch warr. But I undeceived a great many, telling them
how it is.