22nd. Up and to my office, where busy all the morning. At noon to the
‘Change, and so home to dinner, and then down by water to Deptford,
where coming too soon, I spent an houre in looking round the yarde, and
putting Mr. Shish

     [Jonas Shish, master-shipwright at Deptford.  There are several
     papers of his among the State Papers.  “I was at the funeral of old
     Mr. Shish, Master Shipwright of His Majesty’s Yard here, an honest
     and remarkable man, and his death a public loss, for his excellent
     success in building ships (though altogether illiterate) and for
     bringing up so many of his children to be able artists.  I held up
     the pall with three knights who did him that honour, and he was
     worthy of it.  It was the custom of this good man to rise in the
     night and pray, kneeling in his own coffin, which he had lying by
     him for many years.  He was born that famous year, the Gunpowder-
     plot, 1605” (Evelyn’s “Diary,” May 13th, 1680).]

to measure a piece or two of timber, which he did most cruelly wrong,
and to the King’s losse 12 or 13s. in a piece of 28 feet in contents.
Thence to the Clerke of the Cheques, from whose house Mr. Falconer was
buried to-day; Sir J. Minnes and I the only principal officers that
were there. We walked to church with him, and then I left them without
staying the sermon and straight home by water, and there find, as I
expected, Mr. Hill, and Andrews, and one slovenly and ugly fellow,
Seignor Pedro, who sings Italian songs to the theorbo most neatly,
and they spent the whole evening in singing the best piece of musique
counted of all hands in the world, made by Seignor Charissimi, the
famous master in Rome. Fine it was, indeed, and too fine for me to judge
of. They have spoke to Pedro to meet us every weeke, and I fear it
will grow a trouble to me if we once come to bid judges to meet us,
especially idle Masters, which do a little displease me to consider.
They gone comes Mr. Lanyon, who tells me Mr. Alsopp is now become
dangerously ill, and fears his recovery, covery, which shakes my
expectation of L630 per annum by the business; and, therefore, bless God
for what Mr. Gauden hath sent me, which, from some discourse to-day with
Mr. Osborne, swearing that he knows not any thing of this business of
the victualling; but, the contrary, that it is not that moves Mr. Gauden
to send it me, for he hath had order for it any time these two months.
Whether this be true or no, I know not; but I shall hence with the more
confidence keepe it. To supper and to the office a little, and to walk
in the garden, the moon shining bright, and fine warm fair weather, and
so home to bed.