29th (Whitsunday. King’s Birth and Restauration day). Up, and having
received a letter last night desiring it from Mr. Coventry, I walked
to St. James’s, and there he and I did long discourse together of the
business of the office, and the warr with the Dutch; and he seemed to
argue mightily with the little reason that there is for all this. For
first, as to the wrong we pretend they have done us: that of the East
Indys, for their not delivering of Poleron, it is not yet known whether
they have failed or no; that of their hindering the Leopard cannot
amount to above L3,000 if true; that of the Guinny Company, all they had
done us did not amount to above L200 or L300 he told me truly; and that
now, from what Holmes, without any commission, hath done in taking an
island and two forts, hath set us much in debt to them; and he believes
that Holmes will have been so puffed up with this, that he by this time
hath been enforced with more strength than he had then, hath, I say,
done a great deale more wrong to them. He do, as to the effect of the
warr, tell me clearly that it is not any skill of the Dutch that can
hinder our trade if we will, we having so many advantages over them, of
winds, good ports, and men; but it is our pride, and the laziness of the
merchant. He seems to think that there may be some negotiation which may
hinder a warr this year, but that he speaks doubtfully as unwilling I
perceive to be thought to discourse any such thing. The main thing he
desired to speake with me about was, to know whether I do understand my
Lord Sandwich’s intentions as to going to sea with this fleete; saying,
that the Duke, if he desires it, is most willing to it; but thinking
that twelve ships is not a fleete fit for my Lord to be troubled to
go out with, he is not willing to offer it to him till he hath some
intimations of his mind to go, or not. He spoke this with very great
respect as to my Lord, though methinks it is strange they should not
understand one another better at this time than to need another’s
mediation. Thence walked over the Parke to White Hall, Mr. Povy with me,
and was taken in a very great showre in the middle of the Parke that we
were very wet. So up into, the house and with him to the King’s closett,
whither by and by the King came, my Lord Sandwich carrying the sword.
A Bishopp preached, but he speaking too low for me to hear behind the
King’s closett, I went forth and walked and discoursed with Colonell
Reames, who seems a very willing man to be informed in his business of
canvas, which he is undertaking to strike in with us to serve the Navy.
By and by my Lord Sandwich came forth, and called me to him: and we fell
into discourse a great while about his business, wherein he seems to
be very open with me, and to receive my opinion as he used to do; and
I hope I shall become necessary to him again. He desired me to think of
the fitness, or not, for him to offer himself to go to sea; and to give
him my thoughts in a day or two. Thence after sermon among the ladies on
the Queene’s side; where I saw Mrs. Stewart, very fine and pretty, but
far beneath my Lady Castlemayne. Thence with Mr. Povy home to dinner;
where extraordinary cheer. And after dinner up and down to see his
house. And in a word, methinks, for his perspective upon his wall in
his garden, and the springs rising up with the perspective in the little
closett; his room floored above with woods of several colours, like but
above the best cabinet-work I ever saw; his grotto and vault, with his
bottles of wine, and a well therein to keep them cool; his furniture
of all sorts; his bath at the top of his house, good pictures, and his
manner of eating and drinking; do surpass all that ever I did see of one
man in all my life. Thence walked home and found my uncle Wight and Mr.
Rawlinson, who supped with me. They being gone, I to bed, being in some
pain from my being so much abroad to-day, which is a most strange thing
that in such warm weather the least ayre should get cold and wind in me.
I confess it makes me mighty sad and out of all content in the world.