22nd. Up and shaved myself, and then my wife and I by coach out, and I
set her down by her father’s, being vexed in my mind and angry with her
for the ill-favoured place, among or near the whore houses, that she is
forced to come to him. So left her there, and I to Sir Th. Warwick’s but
did not speak with him. Thence to take a turn in St. James’s Park, and
meeting with Anth. Joyce walked with him a turn in the Pell Mell and
so parted, he St. James’s ward and I out to Whitehall ward, and so to
a picture-sellers by the Half Moone in the street over against the
Exchange, and there looked over the maps of several cities and did buy
two books of cities stitched together cost me 9s. 6d., and when I came
home thought of my vowe, and paid 5s. into my poor box for it, hoping
in God that I shall forfeit no more in that kind. Thence, meeting Mr.
Moore, and to the Exchange and there found my wife at pretty Doll’s,
and thence by coach set her at my uncle Wight’s, to go with my aunt to
market once more against Lent, and I to the Coffee-house, and thence
to the ‘Change, my chief business being to enquire about the manner of
other countries keeping of their masts wet or dry, and got good advice
about it, and so home, and alone ate a bad, cold dinner, my people being
at their washing all day, and so to the office and all the afternoon
upon my letter to Mr. Coventry about keeping of masts, and ended it very
well at night and wrote it fair over. This evening came Mr. Alsopp the
King’s brewer, with whom I spent an houre talking and bewailing the
posture of things at present; the King led away by half-a-dozen men,
that none of his serious servants and friends can come at him. These
are Lauderdale, Buckingham, Hamilton, Fitz-Harding (to whom he hath, it
seems, given L2,000 per annum in the best part of the King’s estate);
and that that the old Duke of Buckingham could never get of the King.
Progers is another, and Sir H. Bennett. He loves not the Queen at all,
but is rather sullen to her; and she, by all reports, incapable of
children. He is so fond of the Duke of Monmouth, that every body admires
it; and he says the Duke hath said, that he would be the death of any
man that says the King was not married to his mother: though Alsopp
says, it is well known that she was a common whore before the King lay
with her. But it seems, he says, that the King is mighty kind to these
his bastard children; and at this day will go at midnight to my Lady
Castlemaine’s nurses, and take the child and dance it in his arms: that
he is not likely to have his tables up again in his house,--[The tables
at which the king dined in public.-B.]--for the crew that are about
him will not have him come to common view again, but keep him obscurely
among themselves. He hath this night, it seems, ordered that the Hall
(which there is a ball to be in to-night before the King) be guarded, as
the Queen-Mother’s is, by his Horse Guards; whereas heretofore they were
by the Lord Chamberlain or Steward, and their people. But it is feared
they will reduce all to the soldiery, and all other places taken away;
and what is worst of all, that he will alter the present militia, and
bring all to a flying army. That my Lord Lauderdale, being Middleton’s
enemy, and one that scorns the Chancellor even to open affronts before
the King, hath got the whole power of Scotland into his hand; whereas
the other day he was in a fair way to have had his whole estate, and
honour, and life, voted away from him. That the King hath done himself
all imaginable wrong in the business of my Lord Antrim, in Ireland;
who, though he was the head of rebels, yet he by his letter owns to have
acted by his father’s and mother’s, and his commissions; but it seems
the truth is, he hath obliged himself, upon the clearing of his estate,
to settle it upon a daughter of the Queene-Mother’s (by my Lord Germin,
I suppose,) in marriage, be it to whom the Queene pleases; which is a
sad story. It seems a daughter of the Duke of Lenox’s was, by force,
going to be married the other day at Somerset House, to Harry Germin;
but she got away and run to the King, and he says he will protect her.
She is, it seems, very near akin to the King: Such mad doings there are
every day among them! The rape upon a woman at Turnstile the other day,
her husband being bound in his shirt, they both being in bed together,
it being night, by two Frenchmen, who did not only lye with her but
abused her with a linke, is hushed up for L300, being the Queen Mother’s
servants. There was a French book in verse, the other day, translated
and presented to the Duke of Monmouth in such a high stile, that the
Duke of York, he tells me, was mightily offended at it. The Duke of
Monmouth’s mother’s brother hath a place at Court; and being a Welchman
(I think he told me) will talk very broad of the King’s being married to
his sister. The King did the other day, at the Council, commit my Lord
Digby’s’ chaplin, and steward, and another servant, who went upon the
process begun there against their lord, to swear that they saw him at
church, end receive the Sacrament as a Protestant, (which, the judges
said, was sufficient to prove him such in the eye of the law); the King,
I say, did commit them all to the Gate-house, notwithstanding their
pleading their dependance upon him, and the faith they owed him as their
lord, whose bread they eat. And that the King should say, that he would
soon see whether he was King, or Digby. That the Queene-Mother hath
outrun herself in her expences, and is now come to pay very ill, or run
in debt; the money being spent that she received for leases. He believes
there is not any money laid up in bank, as I told him some did hope;
but he says, from the best informers he can assure me there is no such
thing, nor any body that should look after such a thing; and that there
is not now above L80,000 of the Dunkirke money left in stock. That
Oliver in the year when he spent L1,400,000 in the Navy, did spend in
the whole expence of the kingdom L2,600,000. That all the Court are
mad for a Dutch war; but both he and I did concur, that it was a thing
rather to be dreaded than hoped for; unless by the French King’s falling
upon Flanders, they and the Dutch should be divided. That our Embassador
had, it is true, an audience; but in the most dishonourable way
that could be; for the Princes of the Blood (though invited by our
Embassador, which was the greatest absurdity that ever Embassador
committed these 400 years) were not there; and so were not said to give
place to our King’s Embassador. And that our King did openly say, the
other day in the Privy Chamber, that he would not be hectored out of his
right and preeminencys by the King of France, as great as he was. That
the Pope is glad to yield to a peace with the French (as the newes-book
says), upon the basest terms that ever was. That the talke which these
people about our King, that I named before, have, is to tell him how
neither privilege of Parliament nor City is any thing; but his will is
all, and ought to be so: and their discourse, it seems, when they
are alone, is so base and sordid, that it makes the eares of the very
gentlemen of the back-stairs (I think he called them) to tingle to hear
it spoke in the King’s hearing; and that must be very bad indeed. That
my Lord Digby did send to Lisbon a couple of priests, to search out what
they could against the Chancellor concerning the match, as to the point
of his knowing before-hand that the Queene was not capable of bearing
children; and that something was given her to make her so. But as
private as they were, when they came thither they were clapped up
prisoners. That my Lord Digby endeavours what he can to bring the
business into the House of Commons, hoping there to master the
Chancellor, there being many enemies of his there; but I hope the
contrary. That whereas the late King did mortgage ‘Clarendon’ to
somebody for L20,000, and this to have given it to the Duke of
Albemarle, and he sold it to my Lord Chancellor, whose title of Earldome
is fetched from thence; the King hath this day sent his order to the
Privy Seale for the payment of this L20,000 to my Lord Chancellor, to
clear the mortgage! Ireland in a very distracted condition about the
hard usage which the Protestants meet with, and the too good which the
Catholiques. And from altogether, God knows my heart, I expect nothing
but ruine can follow, unless things are better ordered in a little time.
He being gone my wife came and told me how kind my uncle Wight had been
to her to-day, and that though she says that all his kindness comes from
respect to her she discovers nothing but great civility from him, yet
but what she says he otherwise will tell me, but to-day he told her
plainly that had she a child it should be his heir, and that should I
or she want he would be a good friend to us, and did give my wife
instructions to consent to all his wife says at any time, she being a
pettish woman, which argues a design I think he has of keeping us in
with his wife in order to our good sure, and he declaring her jealous
of him that so he dares not come to see my wife as otherwise he would do
and will endeavour to do. It looks strange putting all together, but yet
I am in hopes he means well. My aunt also is mighty open to my wife and
tells her mighty plain how her husband did intend to double her portion
to her at his death as a jointure. That he will give presently L100 to
her niece Mary and a good legacy at his death, and it seems did as much
to the other sister, which vexed [me] to think that he should bestow so
much upon his wife’s friends daily as he do, but it cannot be helped for
the time past, and I will endeavour to remedy it for the time to come.
After all this discourse with my wife at my office alone, she home to
see how the wash goes on and I to make an end of my work, and so home to
supper and to bed.