15th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to St. James’s, and there did
our business with the Duke, who tells us more and more signs of a Dutch
warr, and how we must presently set out a fleete for Guinny, for the
Dutch are doing so, and there I believe the warr will begin. Thence home
with him again, in our way he talking of his cures abroad, while he was
with the King as a doctor, and above all men the pox. And among others,
Sir J. Denham he told me he had cured, after it was come to an ulcer
all over his face, to a miracle. To the Coffee-house I, and so to the
‘Change a little, and then home to dinner with Creed, whom I met at the
Coffee-house, and after dinner by coach set him down at the Temple, and
I and my wife to Mr. Blagrave’s. They being none of them at home; I to
the Hall, leaving her there, and thence to the Trumpett, whither came
Mrs. Lane, and there begins a sad story how her husband, as I feared,
proves not worth a farthing, and that she is with child and undone, if I
do not get him a place. I had my pleasure here of her, and she, like an
impudent jade, depends upon my kindness to her husband, but I will have
no more to do with her, let her brew as she has baked, seeing she would
not take my counsel about Hawly. After drinking we parted, and I to
Blagrave’s, and there discoursed with Mrs. Blagrave about her kinswoman,
who it seems is sickly even to frantiqueness sometimes, and among
other things chiefly from love and melancholy upon the death of her
servant,--[Servant = lover.]--insomuch that she telling us all most
simply and innocently I fear she will not be able to come to us with any
pleasure, which I am sorry for, for I think she would have pleased us
very well. In comes he, and so to sing a song and his niece with us,
but she sings very meanly. So through the Hall and thence by coach home,
calling by the way at Charing Crosse, and there saw the great Dutchman
that is come over, under whose arm I went with my hat on, and could not
reach higher than his eye-browes with the tip of my fingers, reaching as
high as I could. He is a comely and well-made man, and his wife a very
little, but pretty comely Dutch woman. It is true, he wears pretty
high-heeled shoes, but not very high, and do generally wear a turbant,
which makes him show yet taller than really he is, though he is very
tall, as I have said before. Home to my office, and then to supper, and
then to my office again late, and so home to bed, my wife and I troubled
that we do not speed better in this business of her woman.