28th. Up and by water with Mr. Tucker down to Woolwich, first to do
several businesses of the King’s, then on board Captain Fisher’s ship,
which we hire to carry goods to Tangier. All the way going and coming
I reading and discoursing over some papers of his which he, poor man,
having some experience, but greater conceit of it than is fit, did at
the King’s first coming over make proposals of, ordering in a new manner
the whole revenue of the kingdom, but, God knows, a most weak thing;
however, one paper I keep wherein he do state the main branches of the
publick revenue fit to consider and remember. So home, very cold, and
fearfull of having got some pain, but, thanks be to God! I was well
after it. So to dinner, and after dinner by coach to White Hall,
thinking to have met at a Committee of Tangier, but nobody being there
but my Lord Rutherford, he would needs carry me and another Scotch Lord
to a play, and so we saw, coming late, part of “The Generall,” my Lord
Orrery’s (Broghill) second play; but, Lord! to see how no more either in
words, sense, or design, it is to his “Harry the 5th” is not imaginable,
and so poorly acted, though in finer clothes, is strange. And here I
must confess breach of a vowe in appearance, but I not desiring it, but
against my will, and my oathe being to go neither at my own charge nor
at another’s, as I had done by becoming liable to give them another, as
I am to Sir W. Pen and Mr. Creed; but here I neither know which of them
paid for me, nor, if I did, am I obliged ever to return the like, or did
it by desire or with any willingness. So that with a safe conscience I
do think my oathe is not broke and judge God Almighty will not think it
other wise. Thence to W. Joyce’s, and there found my aunt and cozen Mary
come home from my father’s with great pleasure and content, and thence
to Kate’s and found her also mighty pleased with her journey and their
good usage of them, and so home, troubled in my conscience at my being
at a play. But at home I found Mercer playing on her Vyall, which is a
pretty instrument, and so I to the Vyall and singing till late, and so
to bed. My mind at a great losse how to go down to Brampton this weeke,
to satisfy Piggott; but what with the fears of my house, my money, my
wife, and my office, I know not how in the world to think of it, Tom
Hater being out of towne, and I having near L1000 in my house.