11th. But betimes up this morning, and, getting ready, we by coach to
Holborne, where, at nine o’clock, they set out, and I and my man Will on
horseback, by my wife, to Barnett; a very pleasant day; and there dined
with her company, which was very good; a pretty gentlewoman with her,
that goes but to Huntington, and a neighbour to us in towne. Here we
staid two hours and then parted for all together, and my poor wife I
shall soon want I am sure. Thence I and Will to see the Wells, half a
mile off,

     [The mineral springs at Barnet Common, nearly a mile to the west of
     High Barnet.  The discovery of the wells was announced in the
     “Perfect Diurnall” of June 5th, 1652, and Fuller, writing in 1662,
     says that there are hopes that the waters may “save as many lives as
     were lost in the fatal battle at Barnet” (“Worthies,” Herts).  A
     pamphlet on “The Barnet Well Water” was published by the Rev. W. M.
     Trinder, M.D., as late as the year 1800, but in 1840 the old well-
     house was pulled down.]

and there I drank three glasses, and went and walked and came back and
drunk two more; the woman would have had me drink three more; but I
could not, my belly being full, but this wrought very well, and so we
rode home, round by Kingsland, Hackney, and Mile End till we were quite
weary, and my water working at least 7 or 8 times upon the road, which
pleased me well, and so home weary, and not being very well, I betimes
to bed, and there fell into a most mighty sweat in the night, about
eleven o’clock, and there, knowing what money I have in the house and
hearing a noyse, I begun to sweat worse and worse, till I melted almost
to water. I rung, and could not in half an houre make either of the
wenches hear me, and this made me fear the more, lest they might be
gaga; and then I begun to think that there was some design in a stone
being flung at the window over our stayres this evening, by which the
thiefes meant to try what looking there would be after them and know
our company. These thoughts and fears I had, and do hence apprehend the
fears of all rich men that are covetous and have much money by them.
At last Jane rose, and then I understand it was only the dogg wants a
lodging and so made a noyse. So to bed, but hardly slept, at last did,
and so till morning,