26th. Up, and after dressing myself handsomely for riding, I out, and
by water to Westminster, to Mr. Creed’s chamber, and after drinking
some chocolate, and playing on the vyall, Mr. Mallard being there, upon
Creed’s new vyall, which proves, methinks, much worse than mine, and,
looking upon his new contrivance of a desk and shelves for books, we set
out from an inne hard by, whither Mr. Coventry’s horse was carried, and
round about the bush through bad ways to Highgate. Good discourse in the
way had between us, and it being all day a most admirable pleasant day,
we, upon consultation, had stopped at the Cocke, a mile on this side
Barnett, being unwilling to put ourselves to the charge or doubtful
acceptance of any provision against my Lord’s coming by, and there got
something and dined, setting a boy to look towards Barnett Hill, against
their coming; and after two or three false alarms, they come, and we met
the coach very gracefully, and I had a kind receipt from both Lord and
Lady as I could wish, and some kind discourse, and then rode by the
coach a good way, and so fell to discoursing with several of the people,
there being a dozen attending the coach, and another for the mayds and
parson. Among others talking with W. Howe, he told me how my Lord in
his hearing the other day did largely tell my Lord Peterborough and Povy
(who went with them down to Hinchinbrooke) how and when he discarded
Creed, and took me to him, and that since the Duke of York has several
times thanked him for me, which did not a little please me, and anon
I desiring Mr. Howe to tell me upon [what] occasion this discourse
happened, he desired me to say nothing of it now, for he would not
have my Lord to take notice of our being together, but he would tell me
another time, which put me into some trouble to think what he meant by
it. But when we came to my Lord’s house, I went in; and whether it was
my Lord’s neglect, or general indifference, I know not, but he made
me no kind of compliment there; and, methinks, the young ladies look
somewhat highly upon me. So I went away without bidding adieu to
anybody, being desirous not to be thought too servile. But I do hope and
believe that my Lord do yet value me as high as ever, though he dare not
admit me to the freedom he once did, and that my Lady is still the same
woman. So rode home and there found my uncle Wight. ‘Tis an odd thing
as my wife tells me his caressing her and coming on purpose to give her
visits, but I do not trouble myself for him at all, but hope the best
and very good effects of it. He being gone I eat something and my
wife. I told all this day’s passages, and she to give me very good
and rational advice how to behave myself to my Lord and his family, by
slighting every body but my Lord and Lady, and not to seem to have
the least society or fellowship with them, which I am resolved to do,
knowing that it is my high carriage that must do me good there, and to
appear in good clothes and garbe. To the office, and being weary, early
home to bed.