6th. Up and to my office, whither by and by came John Noble, my father’s
old servant, to speake with me. I smelling the business, took him home;
and there, all alone, he told me how he had been serviceable to my
brother Tom, in the business of his getting his servant, an ugly jade,
Margaret, with child. She was brought to bed in St. Sepulchre’s parish
of two children; one is dead, the other is alive; her name Elizabeth,
and goes by the name of Taylor, daughter to John Taylor. It seems Tom
did a great while trust one Crawly with the business, who daily got
money of him; and at last, finding himself abused, he broke the matter
to J. Noble, upon a vowe of secresy. Tom’s first plott was to go on
the other side the water and give a beggar woman something to take the
child. They did once go, but did nothing, J. Noble saying that seven
years hence the mother might come to demand the child and force him to
produce it, or to be suspected of murder. Then I think it was that they
consulted, and got one Cave, a poor pensioner in St. Bride’s parish
to take it, giving him L5, he thereby promising to keepe it for ever
without more charge to them. The parish hereupon indite the man Cave
for bringing this child upon the parish, and by Sir Richard Browne he
is sent to the Counter. Cave thence writes to Tom to get him out. Tom
answers him in a letter of his owne hand, which J. Noble shewed me, but
not signed by him, wherein he speaks of freeing him and getting security
for him, but nothing as to the business of the child, or anything like
it: so that forasmuch as I could guess, there is nothing therein to my
brother’s prejudice as to the main point, and therefore I did not labour
to tear or take away the paper. Cave being released, demands L5 more to
secure my brother for ever against the child; and he was forced to give
it him and took bond of Cave in L100, made at a scrivener’s, one Hudson,
I think, in the Old Bayly, to secure John Taylor, and his assigns, &c.
(in consideration of L10 paid him), from all trouble, or charge of meat,
drink, clothes, and breeding of Elizabeth Taylor; and it seems, in
the doing of it, J. Noble was looked upon as the assignee of this John
Taylor. Noble says that he furnished Tom with this money, and is also
bound by another bond to pay him 20s. more this next Easter Monday; but
nothing for either sum appears under Tom’s hand. I told him how I
am like to lose a great sum by his death, and would not pay any more
myself, but I would speake to my father about it against the afternoon.
So away he went, and I all the morning in my office busy, and at noon
home to dinner mightily oppressed with wind, and after dinner took coach
and to Paternoster Row, and there bought a pretty silke for a petticoate
for my wife, and thence set her down at the New Exchange, and I leaving
the coat at Unthanke’s, went to White Hall, but the Councell meeting
at Worcester House I went thither, and there delivered to the Duke of
Albemarle a paper touching some Tangier business, and thence to the
‘Change for my wife, and walked to my father’s, who was packing up some
things for the country. I took him up and told him this business of Tom,
at which the poor wretch was much troubled, and desired me that I would
speak with J. Noble, and do what I could and thought fit in it without
concerning him in it. So I went to Noble, and saw the bond that Cave did
give and also Tom’s letter that I mentioned above, and upon the whole I
think some shame may come, but that it will be hard from any thing I see
there to prove the child to be his. Thence to my father and told what I
had done, and how I had quieted Noble by telling him that, though we are
resolved to part with no more money out of our own purses, yet if he can
make it appear a true debt that it may be justifiable for us to pay it,
we will do our part to get it paid, and said that I would have it paid
before my own debt. So my father and I both a little satisfied, though
vexed to think what a rogue my brother was in all respects. I took my
wife by coach home, and to my office, where late with Sir W. Warren, and
so home to supper and to bed. I heard to-day that the Dutch have begun
with us by granting letters of marke against us; but I believe it not.