February 1st. Up (my maids rising early this morning to washing), and
being ready I found Mr. Strutt the purser below with 12 bottles of
sacke, and tells me (which from Sir W. Batten I had heard before) how
young Jack Davis has railed against Sir W. Batten for his endeavouring
to turn him out of his place, at which for the fellow’s sake, because it
will likely prove his ruin, I am sorry, though I do believe he is a very
arch rogue. I took Strutt by coach with me to White Hall, where I set
him down, and I to my Lord’s, but found him gone out betimes to the
Wardrobe, which I am glad to see that he so attends his business, though
it troubles me that my counsel to my prejudice must be the cause of it.
They tell me that he goes into the country next week, and that the young
ladies come up this week before the old lady. Here I hear how two men
last night, justling for the wall about the New Exchange, did kill one
another, each thrusting the other through; one of them of the King’s
Chappell, one Cave, and the other a retayner of my Lord Generall
Middleton’s. Thence to White Hall; where, in the Duke’s chamber, the
King came and stayed an hour or two laughing at Sir W. Petty, who was
there about his boat; and at Gresham College in general; at which poor
Petty was, I perceive, at some loss; but did argue discreetly, and bear
the unreasonable follies of the King’s objections and other bystanders
with great discretion; and offered to take oddes against the King’s best
boates; but the King would not lay, but cried him down with words
only. Gresham College he mightily laughed at, for spending time only
in weighing of ayre, and doing nothing else since they sat. Thence to
Westminster Hall, and there met with diverse people, it being terme
time. Among others I spoke with Mrs. Lane, of whom I doubted to hear
something of the effects of our last meeting about a fortnight or three
weeks ago, but to my content did not. Here I met with Mr. Pierce, who
tells me of several passages at Court, among others how the King,
coming the other day to his Theatre to see “The Indian Queene” (which he
commends for a very fine thing), my Lady Castlemaine was in the next box
before he came; and leaning over other ladies awhile to whisper to the
King, she rose out of the box and went into the King’s, and set herself
on the King’s right hand, between the King and the Duke of York; which,
he swears, put the King himself, as well as every body else, out of
countenance; and believes that she did it only to show the world that
she is not out of favour yet, as was believed. Thence with Alderman
Maynell by his coach to the ‘Change, and there with several people busy,
and so home to dinner, and took my wife out immediately to the King’s
Theatre, it being a new month, and once a month I may go, and there saw
“The Indian Queene” acted; which indeed is a most pleasant show, and
beyond my expectation; the play good, but spoiled with the ryme, which
breaks the sense. But above my expectation most, the eldest Marshall did
do her part most excellently well as I ever heard woman in my life; but
her voice not so sweet as Ianthe’s; but, however, we came home mightily
contented. Here we met Mr. Pickering and his mistress, Mrs. Doll Wilde;
he tells me that the business runs high between the Chancellor and my
Lord Bristoll against the Parliament; and that my Lord Lauderdale and
Cooper open high against the Chancellor; which I am sorry for. In my
way home I ‘light and to the Coffee-house, where I heard Lt. Coll. Baron
tell very good stories of his travels over the high hills in Asia above
the clouds, how clear the heaven is above them, how thicke like a mist
the way is through the cloud that wets like a sponge one’s clothes,
the ground above the clouds all dry and parched, nothing in the world
growing, it being only a dry earth, yet not so hot above as below the
clouds. The stars at night most delicate bright and a fine clear blue
sky, but cannot see the earth at any time through the clouds, but the
clouds look like a world below you. Thence home and to supper, being
hungry, and so to the office, did business, specially about Creed,
for whom I am now pretty well fitted, and so home to bed. This day in
Westminster Hall W. Bowyer told me that his father is dead lately, and
died by being drowned in the river, coming over in the night; but he
says he had not been drinking. He was taken with his stick in his hand
and cloake over his shoulder, as ruddy as before he died. His horse was
taken overnight in the water, hampered in the bridle, but they were so
silly as not to look for his master till the next morning, that he was
found drowned.