28th (Lord’s day). Up and walked to Paul’s; and by chance it was an
extraordinary day for the Readers of the Inns of Court and all the
Students to come to church, it being an old ceremony not used these
twenty-five years, upon the first Sunday in Lent. Abundance there was
of Students, more than there was room to seat but upon forms, and the
Church mighty full. One Hawkins preached, an Oxford man. A good sermon
upon these words: “But the wisdom from above is first pure, then
peaceable.” Both before and after sermon I was most impatiently troubled
at the Quire, the worst that ever I heard. But what was extraordinary,
the Bishop of London, who sat there in a pew, made a purpose for him by
the pulpitt, do give the last blessing to the congregation; which
was, he being a comely old man, a very decent thing, methought. The
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir J. Robinson, would needs have me by coach
home with him, and sending word home to my house I did go and dine
with him, his ordinary table being very good, and his lady a very
high-carriaged but comely big woman; I was mightily pleased with her.
His officers of his regiment dined with him. No discourse at table to
any purpose, only after dinner my Lady would needs see a boy which was
represented to her to be an innocent country boy brought up to towne a
day or two ago, and left here to the wide world, and he losing his way
fell into the Tower, which my Lady believes, and takes pity on him, and
will keep him; but though a little boy and but young, yet he tells his
tale so readily and answers all questions so wittily, that for certain
he is an arch rogue, and bred in this towne; but my Lady will not
believe it, but ordered victuals to be given him, and I think will keep
him as a footboy for their eldest son. After dinner to chappell in the
Tower with the Lieutenant, with the keyes carried before us, and
the Warders and Gentleman-porter going before us. And I sat with the
Lieutenant in his pew, in great state, but slept all the sermon. None,
it seems, of the prisoners in the Tower that are there now, though they
may, will come to prayers there. Church being done, I back to Sir John’s
house and there left him and home, and by and by to Sir W. Pen, and
staid a while talking with him about Sir J. Minnes his folly in his
office, of which I am sicke and weary to speak of it, and how the King
is abused in it, though Pen, I know, offers the discourse only like a
rogue to get it out of me, but I am very free to tell my mind to him, in
that case being not unwilling he should tell him again if he will or any
body else. Thence home, and walked in the garden by brave moonshine with
my wife above two hours, till past 8 o’clock, then to supper, and after
prayers to bed.