9th. Up, and to put things in order against dinner. I out and bought
several things, among others, a dozen of silver salts; home, and to the
office, where some of us met a little, and then home, and at noon comes
my company, namely, Anthony and Will Joyce and their wives, my aunt
James newly come out of Wales, and my cozen Sarah Gyles. Her husband did
not come, and by her I did understand afterwards, that it was because he
was not yet able to pay me the 40s. she had borrowed a year ago of me.

     [Pepys would have been more proud of his cousin had he anticipated
     her husband’s becoming a knight, for she was probably the same
     person whose burial is recorded in the register of St. Helen’s,
     Bishopsgate, September 4th, 1704: “Dame Sarah Gyles, widow, relict
     of Sir John Gyles.”--B.]

I was as merry as I could, giving them a good dinner; but W. Joyce did
so talk, that he made every body else dumb, but only laugh at him. I
forgot there was Mr. Harman and his wife, my aunt, a very good harmlesse
woman. All their talke is of her and my two she-cozen Joyces and Will’s
little boy Will (who was also here to-day), down to Brampton to my
father’s next week, which will be trouble and charge to them, but
however my father and mother desire to see them, and so let them. They
eyed mightily my great cupboard of plate, I this day putting my two
flaggons upon my table; and indeed it is a fine sight, and better than
ever I did hope to see of my owne. Mercer dined with us at table, this
being her first dinner in my house. After dinner left them and to White
Hall, where a small Tangier Committee, and so back again home, and there
my wife and Mercer and Tom and I sat till eleven at night, singing and
fiddling, and a great joy it is to see me master of so much pleasure in
my house, that it is and will be still, I hope, a constant pleasure to
me to be at home. The girle plays pretty well upon the harpsicon, but
only ordinary tunes, but hath a good hand; sings a little, but hath a
good voyce and eare. My boy, a brave boy, sings finely, and is the most
pleasant boy at present, while his ignorant boy’s tricks last, that ever
I saw. So to supper, and with great pleasure to bed.