16th. Up in the morning, my head mightily confounded with the great
deale of business I have upon me to do. But to the office, and there
dispatched Mr. Creed’s business pretty well about his bill; but then
there comes W. Howe for my Lord’s bill of Imprest for L500 to carry with
him this voyage, and so I was at a loss how to carry myself in it, Creed
being there, but there being no help I delivered it to them both, and
let them contend, when I perceive they did both endeavour to have it,
but W. Howe took it, and the other had the discretion to suffer it. But
I think I cleared myself to Creed that it past not from any practice
of mine. At noon rose and did some necessary business at the ‘Change.
Thence to Trinity House to a dinner which Sir G. Carteret makes there
as Maister this year. Thence to White Hall to the Tangier Committee, and
there, above my expectation, got the business of our contract for the
victualling carried for my people, viz., Alsopp, Lanyon, and Yeabsly;
and by their promise I do thereby get L300 per annum to myself, which
do overjoy me; and the matter is left to me to draw up. Mr. Lewes was in
the gallery and is mightily amazed at it, and I believe Mr. Gauden will
make some stir about it, for he wrote to Mr. Coventry to-day about it to
argue why he should for the King’s convenience have it, but Mr. Coventry
most justly did argue freely for them that served cheapest. Thence
walked a while with Mr. Coventry in the gallery, and first find that he
is mighty cold in his present opinion of Mr. Peter Pett for his flagging
and doing things so lazily there, and he did also surprise me with
a question why Deane did not bring in their report of the timber of
Clarendon. What he means thereby I know not, but at present put him off;
nor do I know how to steer myself: but I must think of it, and advise
with my Lord Sandwich. Thence with Creed by coach to my Lord Sandwich’s,
and there I got Mr. Moore to give me my Lord’s hand for my receipt of
L109 more of my money of Sir G. Carteret, so that then his debt to me
will be under L500, I think. This do ease my mind also. Thence carried
him and W. Howe into London, and set them down at Sir G. Carteret’s to
receive some money, and I home and there busy very late, and so home to
supper and to bed, with my mind in pretty good ease, my business being
in a pretty good condition every where.