9th. Up (my underlip being mightily swelled, I know not how but by
overrubbing it, it itching) and to the office, where we sat all the
morning, and at noon I home to dinner, and by discourse with my wife
thought upon inviting my Lord Sandwich to a dinner shortly. It will
cost me at least ten or twelve pounds; but, however, some arguments of
prudence I have, which however I shall think again upon before I proceed
to that expence. After dinner by coach I carried my wife and Jane to
Westminster, leaving her at Mr. Hunt’s, and I to Westminster Hall, and
there visited Mrs. Lane, and by appointment went out and met her at
the Trumpet, Mrs. Hare’s, but the room being damp we went to the Bell
tavern, and there I had her company, but could not do as I used to do
(yet nothing but what was honest)..... So I to talk about her having
Hawley, she told me flatly no, she could not love him. I took occasion
to enquire of Howlett’s daughter, with whom I have a mind to meet a
little to see what mettle the young wench is made of, being very pretty,
but she tells me she is already betrothed to Mrs. Michell’s son, and
she in discourse tells me more, that Mrs. Michell herself had a daughter
before marriage, which is now near thirty years old, a thing I could not
have believed. Thence leading her to the Hall, I took coach and called
my wife and her mayd, and so to the New Exchange, where we bought
several things of our pretty Mrs. Dorothy Stacy, a pretty woman, and
has the modestest look that ever I saw in my life and manner of speech.
Thence called at Tom’s and saw him pretty well again, but has not been
currant. So homeward, and called at Ludgate, at Ashwell’s uncle’s, but
she was not within, to have spoke to her to have come to dress my
wife at the time my Lord dines here. So straight home, calling for
Walsingham’s Manuals at my bookseller’s to read but not to buy,
recommended for a pretty book by Sir W. Warren, whose warrant however
I do not much take till I do read it. So home to supper and to bed,
my wife not being very well since she came home, being troubled with a
fainting fit, which she never yet had before since she was my wife.