7th. Up, putting on my best clothes and to the office, where all the
morning we sat busy, among other things upon Mr. Wood’s performance of
his contract for masts, wherein I was mightily concerned, but I think
was found all along in the right, and shall have my desire in it to the
King’s advantage. At noon, all of us to dinner to Sir W. Pen’s, where a
very handsome dinner, Sir J. Lawson among others, and his lady and his
daughter, a very pretty lady and of good deportment, with looking upon
whom I was greatly pleased, the rest of the company of the women were
all of our own house, of no satisfaction or pleasure at all. My wife was
not there, being not well enough, nor had any great mind. But to see
how Sir W. Pen imitates me in everything, even in his having his chimney
piece in his dining room the same with that in my wife’s closett, and in
every thing else I perceive wherein he can. But to see again how he was
out in one compliment: he lets alone drinking any of the ladies’ healths
that were there, my Lady Batten and Lawson, till he had begun with my
Lady Carteret, who was absent, and that was well enough, and then Mr.
Coventry’s mistresse, at which he was ashamed, and would not have had
him have drunk it, at least before the ladies present, but his policy,
as he thought, was such that he would do it. After dinner by coach with
Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes by appointment to Auditor Beale’s in
Salisbury Court, and there we did with great content look over some old
ledgers to see in what manner they were kept, and indeed it was in an
extraordinary good method, and such as (at least out of design to keep
them employed) I do persuade Sir J. Minnes to go upon, which will at
least do as much good it may be to keep them for want of something to do
from envying those that do something. Thence calling to see whether Mrs.
Turner was returned, which she is, and I spoke one word only to her, and
away again by coach home and to my office, where late, and then home to
supper and bed.