5th. Up and to St. James’s, and there did our business with the Duke;
where all our discourse of warr in the highest measure. Prince Rupert
was with us; who is fitting himself to go to sea in the Heneretta. And
afterwards in White Hall I met him and Mr. Gray, and he spoke to me,
and in other discourse, says he, “God damn me, I can answer but for
one ship, and in that I will do my part; for it is not in that as in an
army, where a man can command every thing.” By and by to a Committee
for the Fishery, the Duke of Yorke there, where, after Duke was made
Secretary, we fell to name a Committee, whereof I was willing to be one,
because I would have my hand in the business, to understand it and be
known in doing something in it; and so, after cutting out work for the
Committee, we rose, and I to my wife to Unthanke’s, and with her from
shop to shop, laying out near L10 this morning in clothes for her.
And so I to the ‘Change, where a while, and so home and to dinner, and
thither came W. Bowyer and dined with us; but strange to see how he
could not endure onyons in sauce to lamb, but was overcome with the
sight of it, and so-was forced to make his dinner of an egg or two. He
tells us how Mrs. Lane is undone, by her marrying so bad, and desires to
speak with me, which I know is wholly to get me to do something for her
to get her husband a place, which he is in no wise fit for. After dinner
down to Woolwich with a gaily, and then to Deptford, and so home, all
the way reading Sir J. Suck[l]ing’s “Aglaura,” which, methinks, is but a
mean play; nothing of design in it. Coming home it is strange to see how
I was troubled to find my wife, but in a necessary compliment, expecting
Mr. Pen to see her, who had been there and was by her people denied,
which, he having been three times, she thought not fit he should be any
more. But yet even this did raise my jealousy presently and much vex me.
However, he did not come, which pleased me, and I to supper, and to the
office till 9 o’clock or thereabouts, and so home to bed. My aunt James
had been here to-day with Kate Joyce twice to see us. The second time my
wife was at home, and they it seems are going down to Brampton, which I
am sorry for, for the charge that my father will be put to. But it must
be borne with, and my mother has a mind to see them, but I do condemn
myself mightily for my pride and contempt of my aunt and kindred that
are not so high as myself, that I have not seen her all this while, nor
invited her all this while.