29th. Up and to the office, where all the morning, dined at home and
Creed with me; after dinner I to Sir G. Carteret, and with him to his
new house he is taking in Broad Streete, and there surveyed all the
rooms and bounds, in order to the drawing up a lease thereof; and that
done, Mr. Cutler, his landlord, took me up and down, and showed me all
his ground and house, which is extraordinary great, he having bought
all the Augustine Fryers, and many, many a L1000 he hath and will bury
there. So home to my business, clearing my papers and preparing my
accounts against tomorrow for a monthly and a great auditt. So to supper
and to bed. Fresh newes come of our beating the Dutch at Guinny quite
out of all their castles almost, which will make them quite mad here
at home sure. And Sir G. Carteret did tell me, that the King do joy
mightily at it; but asked him laughing, “But,” says he, “how shall I do
to answer this to the Embassador when he comes?” Nay they say that we
have beat them out of the New Netherlands too;

     [Captain (afterwards Sir Robert) Holmes’ expedition to attack the
     Dutch settlements in Africa eventuated in an important exploit.
     Holmes suddenly left the coast of Africa, sailed across the
     Atlantic, and reduced the Dutch settlement of New Netherlands to
     English rule, under the title of New York.  “The short and true
     state of the matter is this: the country mentioned was part of the
     province of Virginia, and, as there is no settling an extensive
     country at once, a few Swedes crept in there, who surrendered the
     plantations they could not defend to the Dutch, who, having bought
     the charts and papers of one Hudson, a seaman, who, by the
     commission from the crown of England, discovered a river, to which
     he gave his name, conceited they had purchased a province.
     Sometimes, when we had strength in those parts, they were English
     subjects; at others, when that strength declined, they were subjects
     of the United Provinces.  However, upon King Charles’s claim the
     States disowned the title, but resumed it during our confusions.  On