20th. Up and by coach to my Lord Sandwich’s, and after long staying till
his coming down (he not sending for me up, but it may be he did not know
I was there), he came down, and I walked with him to the Tennis Court,
and there left him, seeing the King play. At his lodgings this morning
there came to him Mr. W. Montague’s fine lady, which occasioned my
Lord’s calling me to her about some business for a friend of hers
preferred to be a midshipman at sea. My Lord recommended the whole
matter to me. She is a fine confident lady, I think, but not so pretty
as I once thought her. My Lord did also seal a lease for the house he
is now taking in Lincoln’s Inn Fields, which stands him in 250 per annum
rent. Thence by water to my brother’s, whom I find not well in bed,
sicke, they think, of a consumption, and I fear he is not well, but
do not complain, nor desire to take anything. From him I visited Mr.
Honiwood, who is lame, and to thank him for his visit to me the other
day, but we were both abroad. So to Mr. Commander’s in Warwicke Lane, to
speak to him about drawing up my will, which he will meet me about in a
day or two. So to the ‘Change and walked home, thence with Sir Richard
Ford, who told me that Turner is to be hanged to-morrow, and with what
impudence he hath carried out his trial; but that last night, when
he brought him newes of his death, he began to be sober and shed some
tears, and he hopes will die a penitent; he having already confessed all
the thing, but says it was partly done for a joke, and partly to get an
occasion of obliging the old man by his care in getting him his things
again, he having some hopes of being the better by him in his estate
at his death. Home to dinner, and after dinner my wife and I by water,
which we have not done together many a day, that is not since last
summer, but the weather is now very warm, and left her at Axe Yard, and
I to White Hall, and meeting Mr. Pierce walked with him an hour in the
Matted Gallery; among other things he tells me that my Lady Castlemaine
is not at all set by by the King, but that he do doat upon Mrs. Stewart
only; and that to the leaving of all business in the world, and to the
open slighting of the Queene; that he values not who sees him or stands
by him while he dallies with her openly; and then privately in her
chamber below, where the very sentrys observe his going in and out; and
that so commonly, that the Duke or any of the nobles, when they would
ask where the King is, they will ordinarily say, “Is the King above, or
below?” meaning with Mrs. Stewart: that the King do not openly disown
my Lady Castlemaine, but that she comes to Court; but that my Lord
FitzHarding and the Hambletons,

     [The three brothers, George Hamilton, James Hamilton, and the Count
     Antoine Hamilton, author of the “Memoires de Grammont.”]

and sometimes my Lord Sandwich, they say, have their snaps at her. But
he says my Lord Sandwich will lead her from her lodgings in the darkest
and obscurest manner, and leave her at the entrance into the Queene’s
lodgings, that he might be the least observed; that the Duke of Monmouth
the King do still doat on beyond measure, insomuch that the King only,
the Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, and the Duke of Monmouth, do now
wear deep mourning, that is, long cloaks, for the Duchesse of Savoy; so
that he mourns as a Prince of the Blood, while the Duke of York do no
more, and all the nobles of the land not so much; which gives great
offence, and he says the Duke of York do consider. But that the Duke
of York do give himself up to business, and is like to prove a noble
Prince; and so indeed I do from my heart think he will. He says that
it is believed, as well as hoped, that care is taken to lay up a hidden
treasure of money by the King against a bad day, pray God it be so! but
I should be more glad that the King himself would look after business,
which it seems he do not in the least. By and by came by Mr. Coventry,
and so we broke off; and he and I took a turn or two and so parted, and
then my Lord Sandwich came upon me, to speak with whom my business of
coming again to-night to this ende of the town chiefly was, in order to
the seeing in what manner he received me, in order to my inviting him to
dinner to my house, but as well in the morning as now, though I did
wait upon him home and there offered occasion of talk with him, yet he
treated me, though with respect, yet as a stranger, without any of the
intimacy or friendship which he used to do, and which I fear he will
never, through his consciousness of his faults, ever do again. Which I
must confess do trouble me above anything in the world almost, though I
neither do need at present nor fear to need to be so troubled, nay, and
more, though I do not think that he would deny me any friendship now if
I did need it, but only that he has not the face to be free with me, but
do look upon me as a remembrancer of his former vanity, and an espy upon
his present practices, for I perceive that Pickering to-day is great
with him again, and that he has done a great courtesy for Mr. Pierce,
the chirurgeon, to a good value, though both these and none but these
did I mention by name to my Lord in the business which has caused
all this difference between my Lord and me. However, I am resolved to
forbear my laying out my money upon a dinner till I see him in a better
posture, and by grave and humble, though high deportment, to make him
think I do not want him, and that will make him the readier to admit me
to his friendship again, I believe the soonest of anything but downright
impudence, and thrusting myself, as others do, upon him, which yet I
cannot do, not [nor] will not endeavour. So home, calling with my wife
to see my brother again, who was up, and walks up and down the house
pretty well, but I do think he is in a consumption. Home, troubled in
mind for these passages with my Lord, but am resolved to better my case
in my business to make my stand upon my owne legs the better and to
lay up as well as to get money, and among other ways I will have a good
fleece out of Creed’s coat ere it be long, or I will have a fall. So
to my office and did some business, and then home to supper and to bed,
after I had by candlelight shaved myself and cut off all my beard clear,
which will make my worke a great deal the less in shaving.