31st. At the office all the morning, and after dinner there again,
dispatched first my letters, and then to my accounts, not of the month
but of the whole yeare also, and was at it till past twelve at night,
it being bitter cold; but yet I was well satisfied with my worke, and,
above all, to find myself, by the great blessing of God, worth L1349, by
which, as I have spent very largely, so I have laid up above L500 this
yeare above what I was worth this day twelvemonth. The Lord make me for
ever thankful to his holy name for it! Thence home to eat a little and
so to bed. Soon as ever the clock struck one, I kissed my wife in the
kitchen by the fireside, wishing her a merry new yeare, observing that
I believe I was the first proper wisher of it this year, for I did it as
soon as ever the clock struck one.

So ends the old yeare, I bless God, with great joy to me, not only from
my having made so good a yeare of profit, as having spent L420 and laid
up L540 and upwards; but I bless God I never have been in so good plight
as to my health in so very cold weather as this is, nor indeed in any
hot weather, these ten years, as I am at this day, and have been these
four or five months. But I am at a great losse to know whether it be
my hare’s foote, or taking every morning of a pill of turpentine, or my
having left off the wearing of a gowne. My family is, my wife, in good
health, and happy with her; her woman Mercer, a pretty, modest, quiett
mayde; her chambermayde Besse, her cook mayde Jane, the little girl
Susan, and my boy, which I have had about half a yeare, Tom Edwards,
which I took from the King’s chappell, and a pretty and loving quiett
family I have as any man in England. My credit in the world and my
office grows daily, and I am in good esteeme with everybody, I think. My
troubles of my uncle’s estate pretty well over; but it comes to be but
of little profit to us, my father being much supported by my purse. But
great vexations remain upon my father and me from my brother Tom’s death
and ill condition, both to our disgrace and discontent, though no great
reason for either. Publique matters are all in a hurry about a Dutch
warr. Our preparations great; our provocations against them great; and,
after all our presumption, we are now afeard as much of them, as we
lately contemned them. Every thing else in the State quiett, blessed be
God! My Lord Sandwich at sea with the fleete at Portsmouth; sending
some about to cruise for taking of ships, which we have done to a great
number. This Christmas I judged it fit to look over all my papers and
books; and to tear all that I found either boyish or not to be worth
keeping, or fit to be seen, if it should please God to take me away
suddenly. Among others, I found these two or three notes, which I
thought fit to keep.

     ETEXT EDITOR’S BOOKMARKS, PEPY’S DIARY 1664, COMPLETE:

     A real and not a complimentary acknowledgment
     A mad merry slut she is
     About several businesses, hoping to get money by them
     After many protestings by degrees I did arrive at what I would
     All divided that were bred so long at school together
     All ended in love
     All the men were dead of the plague, and the ship cast ashore
     And with the great men in curing of their claps
     At least 12 or 14,000 people in the street (to see the hanging)
     Bath at the top of his house
     Bearing more sayle will go faster than any other ships (multihull)
     Began discourse of my not getting of children
     Below what people think these great people say and do
     But the wench went, and I believe had her turn served
     Came to bed to me, but all would not make me friends
     Chatted with her, her husband out of the way
     Could not saw above 4 inches of the stone in a day
     Do look upon me as a remembrancer of his former vanity
     Doubtfull of himself, and easily be removed from his own opinion
     Drink a dish of coffee
     Even to the having bad words with my wife, and blows too
     Expected musique, the missing of which spoiled my dinner
     Expressly taking care that nobody might see this business done
     Fear of making her think me to be in a better condition
     Fear all his kindness is but only his lust to her
     Feared I might meet with some people that might know me
     Fetch masts from New England
     Few in any age that do mind anything that is abstruse
     Find myself to over-value things when a child
     Gadding abroad to look after beauties
     Generally with corruption, but most indeed with neglect
     God forgive me! what thoughts and wishes I had
     Good writers are not admired by the present
     Greatest businesses are done so superficially
     Had no mind to meddle with her
     Having some experience, but greater conceit of it than is fit
     Hear something of the effects of our last meeting (pregnancy?)
     Helping to slip their calfes when there is occasion
     Her months upon her is gone to bed
     Her impudent tricks and ways of getting money
     How little to be presumed of in our greatest undertakings
     I had agreed with Jane Welsh, but she came not, which vexed me
     I do not like his being angry and in debt both together to me
     I will not by any over submission make myself cheap
     I slept soundly all the sermon
     Ill from my late cutting my hair so close to my head
     In my dining-room she was doing something upon the pott
     In a hackney and full of people, was ashamed to be seen
     Ireland in a very distracted condition
     Irish in Ireland, whom Cromwell had settled all in one corner
     Jane going into the boat did fall down and show her arse
     King is mighty kind to these his bastard children
     King still do doat upon his women, even beyond all shame
     Lay long caressing my wife and talking
     Let her brew as she has baked
     Little children employed, every one to do something
     Mankind pleasing themselves in the easy delights of the world
     Meazles, we fear, or, at least, of a scarlett feavour
     Methought very ill, or else I am grown worse to please
     Mind to have her bring it home
     Mrs. Lane was gone forth, and so I missed of my intent
     My wife was angry with me for not coming home, and for gadding
     My leg fell in a hole broke on the bridge
     My wife made great means to be friends, coming to my bedside
     Never to trust too much to any man in the world
     New Netherlands to English rule, under the title of New York
     Not well, and so had no pleasure at all with my poor wife
     Not when we can, but when we list
     Not the greatest wits, but the steady man
     Nothing of the memory of a man, an houre after he is dead!
     Now against her going into the country (lay together)
     Periwigg he lately made me cleansed of its nits
     Play good, but spoiled with the ryme, which breaks the sense
     Pleased to look upon their pretty daughter
     Pray God give me a heart to fear a fall, and to prepare for it!
     Presse seamen, without which we cannot really raise men
     Pretty sayings, which are generally like paradoxes
     Reduced the Dutch settlement of New Netherlands to English rule
     Rotten teeth and false, set in with wire
     Ryme, which breaks the sense
     Saw “The German Princess” acted, by the woman herself
     Sent my wife to get a place to see Turner hanged
     Shakespeare’s plays
     She had the cunning to cry a great while, and talk and blubber
     She had got and used some puppy-dog water
     Sheriffs did endeavour to get one jewell
     Slabbering my band sent home for another
     So home to prayers and to bed
     Staid two hours with her kissing her, but nothing more
     Strange slavery that I stand in to beauty
     Subject to be put into a disarray upon very small occasions
     Such open flattery is beastly
     Talked with Mrs. Lane about persuading her to Hawly
     Tear all that I found either boyish or not to be worth keeping
     That hair by hair had his horse’s tail pulled off indeed
     Their saws have no teeth, but it is the sand only
     There eat and drank, and had my pleasure of her twice
     There did see Mrs. Lane.....
     These Lords are hard to be trusted
     Things wear out of themselves and come fair again
     Thinks she is with child, but I neither believe nor desire it