24th. Up and out with Captain Witham in several places again to look for
oats for Tangier, and among other places to the City granarys, where
it seems every company have their granary and obliged to keep such a
quantity of corne always there or at a time of scarcity to issue so much
at so much a bushell: and a fine thing it is to see their stores of
all sorts, for piles for the bridge, and for pipes, a thing I never saw
before.

     [From the commencement of the reign of Henry VIII., or perhaps
     earlier, it was the custom of the City of London to provide against
     scarcity, by requiring each of the chartered Companies to keep in
     store a certain quantity of corn, which was to be renewed from time
     to time, and when required for that purpose, produced in the market
     for sale, at such times and prices, and in such quantities, as the
     Lord Mayor or Common Council should direct.  See the report of a
     case in the Court of Chancery, “Attorney-General v. Haberdashers’
     Company” (Mylne and Keens “Reports,” vol. i., p. 420).--B.]

Thence to the office, and there busy all the morning. At noon to my
uncle Wight’s, and there dined, my wife being there all the morning.
After dinner to White Hall; and there met with Mr. Pierce, and he showed
me the Queene’s bed-chamber, and her closett, where she had nothing but
some pretty pious pictures, and books of devotion; and her holy water at
her head as she sleeps, with her clock by her bed-side, wherein a lamp
burns that tells her the time of the night at any time. Thence with him
to the Parke, and there met the Queene coming from Chappell, with her
Mayds of Honour, all in silver-lace gowns again: which is new to me, and
that which I did not think would have been brought up again. Thence he
carried me to the King’s closett: where such variety of pictures, and
other things of value and rarity, that I was properly confounded and
enjoyed no pleasure in the sight of them; which is the only time in my
life that ever I was so at a loss for pleasure, in the greatest plenty
of objects to give it me. Thence home, calling in many places and doing
abundance of errands to my great content, and at night weary home, where
Mr. Creed waited for me, and he and I walked in the garden, where
he told me he is now in a hurry fitting himself for sea, and that it
remains that he deals as an ingenuous man with me in the business I wot
of, which he will do before he goes. But I perceive he will have me do
many good turns for him first, both as to his bills coming to him in
this office, and also in his absence at the Committee of Tangier, which
I promise, and as he acquits himself to me I will willingly do. I would
I knew the worst of it, what it is he intends, that so I may either quit
my hands of him or continue my kindness still to him.