19th. Up, my wife and I having a little anger about her woman already,
she thinking that I take too much care of her at table to mind her (my
wife) of cutting for her, but it soon over, and so up and with Sir W.
Batten and Sir W. Pen to St. James’s, and there did our business with
the Duke, and thence homeward straight, calling at the Coffee-house, and
there had very good discourse with Sir----Blunt and Dr. Whistler about
Egypt and other things. So home to dinner, my wife having put on to-day
her winter new suit of moyre, which is handsome, and so after dinner I
did give her L15 to lay out in linen and necessaries for the house
and to buy a suit for Pall, and I myself to White Hall to a Tangier
Committee, where Colonell Reames hath brought us so full and methodical
an account of all matters there, that I never have nor hope to see the
like of any publique business while I live again. The Committee up, I to
Westminster to Jervas’s, and spoke with Jane; who I find cold and not
so desirous of a meeting as before, and it is no matter, I shall be
the freer from the inconvenience that might follow thereof, besides
offending God Almighty and neglecting my business. So by coach home and
to my office, where late, and so to supper and to bed. I met with Dr.
Pierce to-day, who, speaking of Dr. Frazier’s being so earnest to have
such a one (one Collins) go chyrurgeon to the Prince’s person will have
him go in his terms and with so much money put into his hands, he tells
me (when I was wondering that Frazier should order things with the
Prince in that confident manner) that Frazier is so great with my Lady
Castlemayne, and Stewart, and all the ladies at Court, in helping to
slip their calfes when there is occasion, and with the great men in
curing of their claps that he can do what he please with the King, in
spite of any man, and upon the same score with the Prince; they all
having more or less occasion to make use of him. Sir G. Carteret tells
me this afternoon that the Dutch are not yet ready to set out; and by
that means do lose a good wind which would carry them out and keep us
in, and moreover he says that they begin to boggle in the business, and
he thinks may offer terms of peace for all this, and seems to argue
that it will be well for the King too, and I pray God send it. Colonell
Reames did, among other things, this day tell me how it is clear that,
if my Lord Tiviott had lived, he would have quite undone Tangier, or
designed himself to be master of it. He did put the King upon most
great, chargeable, and unnecessary works there, and took the course
industriously to deter, all other merchants but himself to deal there,
and to make both King and all others pay what he pleased for all that
was brought thither.