11th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten to the Council
Chamber at White Hall, to the Committee of the Lords for the Navy, where
we were made to wait an houre or two before called in. In that time
looking upon some books of heraldry of Sir Edward Walker’s making, which
are very fine, there I observed the Duke of Monmouth’s armes are neatly
done, and his title, “The most noble and high-born Prince, James Scott,
Duke of Monmouth, &c.;” nor could Sir J. Minnes, nor any body there,
tell whence he should take the name of Scott? And then I found my Lord
Sandwich, his title under his armes is, “The most noble and mighty Lord,
Edward, Earl of Sandwich, &c.” Sir Edward Walker afterwards coming in,
in discourse did say that there was none of the families of princes in
Christendom that do derive themselves so high as Julius Caesar, nor
so far by 1000 years, that can directly prove their rise; only some in
Germany do derive themselves from the patrician familys of Rome, but
that uncertainly; and, among other things, did much inveigh against
the writing of romances, that 500 years hence being wrote of matters in
general, true as the romance of Cleopatra, the world will not know which
is the true and which the false. Here was a gentleman attending here
that told us he saw the other day (and did bring the draught of it
to Sir Francis Prigeon) of a monster born of an hostler’s wife at
Salisbury, two women children perfectly made, joyned at the lower part
of their bellies, and every part perfect as two bodies, and only one
payre of legs coming forth on one side from the middle where they
were joined. It was alive 24 hours, and cried and did as all hopefull
children do; but, being showed too much to people, was killed. By and by
we were called in, where a great many lords: Annesly in the chair. But,
Lord! to see what work they will make us, and what trouble we shall have
to inform men in a business they are to begin to know, when the greatest
of our hurry is, is a thing to be lamented; and I fear the consequence
will be bad to us. Thence I by coach to the ‘Change, and thence home
to dinner, my head akeing mightily with much business. Our little girl
better than she was yesterday. After dinner out again by coach to my
Lord Chancellor’s, but could not speak with him, then up and down to
seek Sir Ph. Warwicke, Sir G. Carteret, and my Lord Berkely, but failed
in all, and so home and there late at business. Among other things Mr.
Turner making his complaint to me how my clerks do all the worke and get
all the profit, and he hath no comfort, nor cannot subsist, I did make
him apprehend how he is beholding to me more than to any body for my
suffering him to act as Pourveyour of petty provisions, and told him
so largely my little value of any body’s favour, that I believe he will
make no complaints again a good while. So home to supper and to bed,
after prayers, and having my boy and Mercer give me some, each of them
some, musique.