13th. Though late, past 12, before we went to bed, yet I heard my poor
father up, and so I rang up my people, and I rose and got something to
eat and drink for him, and so abroad, it being a mighty foul day, by
coach, setting my father down in Fleet Streete and I to St. James’s,
where I found Mr. Coventry (the Duke being now come thither for the
summer) with a goldsmith, sorting out his old plate to change for new;
but, Lord! what a deale he hath! I staid and had two or three hours
discourse with him, talking about the disorders of our office, and I
largely to tell him how things are carried by Sir W. Batten and Sir J.
Minnes to my great grief. He seems much concerned also, and for all the
King’s matters that are done after the same rate every where else, and
even the Duke’s household matters too, generally with corruption, but
most indeed with neglect and indifferency. I spoke very loud and clear
to him my thoughts of Sir J. Minnes and the other, and trust him with
the using of them. Then to talk of our business with the Dutch; he tells
me fully that he believes it will not come to a warr; for first, he
showed me a letter from Sir George Downing, his own hand, where he
assures him that the Dutch themselves do not desire, but above all
things fear it, and that they neither have given letters of marke
against our shipps in Guinny, nor do De Ruyter

     [Michael De Ruyter, the Dutch admiral, was born 1607.  He served
     under Tromp in the war against England in 1653, and was Lieutenant
     Admiral General of Holland in 1665.  He died April 26th, 1676, of
     wounds received in a battle with the French off Syracuse.  Among the
     State Papers is a news letter (dated July 14th, 1664) containing
     information as to the views of the Dutch respecting a war with
     England.  “They are preparing many ships, and raising 6,000 men, and
     have no doubt of conquering by sea.”  “A wise man says the States
     know how to master England by sending moneys into Scotland for them
     to rebel, and also to the discontented in England, so as to place
     the King in the same straits as his father was, and bring him to
     agree with Holland” (“Calendar,” 1663-64, p. 642).]

stay at home with his fleet with an eye to any such thing, but for want
of a wind, and is now come out and is going to the Streights. He tells
me also that the most he expects is that upon the merchants’ complaints,
the Parliament will represent them to the King, desiring his securing of
his subjects against them, and though perhaps they may not directly
see fit, yet even this will be enough to let the Dutch know that the
Parliament do not oppose the King, and by that means take away their
hopes, which was that the King of England could not get money or do
anything towards a warr with them, and so thought themselves free from
making any restitution, which by this they will be deceived in. He
tells me also that the Dutch states are in no good condition themselves,
differing one with another, and that for certain none but the states of
Holland and Zealand will contribute towards a warr, the others reckoning
themselves, being inland, not concerned in the profits of warr or peace.
But it is pretty to see what he says, that those here that are forward
for a warr at Court, they are reported in the world to be only designers
of getting money into the King’s hands, they that elsewhere are for
it have a design to trouble the kingdom and to give the Fanatiques an
opportunity of doing hurt, and lastly those that are against it (as
he himself for one is very cold therein) are said to be bribed by the
Dutch. After all this discourse he carried me in his coach, it raining
still, to, Charing Cross, and there put me into another, and I calling
my father and brother carried them to my house to dinner, my wife
keeping bed all day..... All the afternoon at the office with W. Boddam
looking over his particulars about the Chest of Chatham, which shows
enough what a knave Commissioner Pett hath been all along, and how Sir
W. Batten hath gone on in getting good allowance to himself and others
out of the poors’ money. Time will show all. So in the evening to see
Sir W. Pen, and then home to my father to keep him company, he being to
go out of town, and up late with him and my brother John till past 12
at night to make up papers of Tom’s accounts fit to leave with my cozen
Scott. At last we did make an end of them, and so after supper all to
bed.