20th. Up and to the office a while, but this day the Parliament meeting
only to be adjourned to November (which was done, accordingly), we did
not meet, and so I forth to bespeak a case to be made to keep my stone
in, which will cost me 25s. Thence I walked to Cheapside, there to see
the effect of a fire there this morning, since four o’clock; which I
find in the house of Mr. Bois, that married Dr. Fuller’s niece, who are
both out of towne, leaving only a mayde and man in towne. It begun in
their house, and hath burned much and many houses backward, though none
forward; and that in the great uniform pile of buildings in the middle
of Cheapside. I am very sorry for them, for the Doctor’s sake. Thence
to the ‘Change, and so home to dinner. And thence to Sir W. Batten’s,
whither Sir Richard Ford came, the Sheriffe, who hath been at this fire
all the while; and he tells me, upon my question, that he and the Mayor
were there, as it is their dutys to be, not only to keep the peace, but
they have power of commanding the pulling down of any house or houses,
to defend the whole City. By and by comes in the Common Cryer of the
City to speak with him; and when he was gone, says he, “You may see
by this man the constitution of the Magistracy of this City; that this
fellow’s place, I dare give him (if he will be true to me) L1000 for
his profits every year, and expect to get L500 more to myself thereby.
When,” says he, “I in myself am forced to spend many times as much.” By
and by came Mr. Coventry, and so we met at the office, to hire ships for
Guinny, and that done broke up. I to Sir W. Batten’s, there to discourse
with Mrs. Falconer, who hath been with Sir W. Pen this evening, after
Mr. Coventry had promised her half what W. Bodham had given him for his
place, but Sir W. Pen, though he knows that, and that Mr. Bodham hath
said that his place hath cost him L100 and would L100 more, yet is he
so high against the poor woman that he will not hear to give her a
farthing, but it seems do listen after a lease where he expects Mr.
Falconer hath put in his daughter’s life, and he is afraid that that is
not done, and did tell Mrs. Falconer that he would see it and know what
is done therein in spite of her, when, poor wretch, she neither do nor
can hinder him the knowing it. Mr. Coventry knows of this business of
the lease, and I believe do think of it as well as I. But the poor woman
is gone home without any hope, but only Mr. Coventry’s own nobleness. So
I to my office and wrote many letters, and so to supper and to bed.