4th. Up, and walked to my Lord Sandwich’s; and there spoke with him
about W. Joyce, who told me he would do what was fit in so tender a
point. I can yet discern a coldness in him to admit me to any discourse
with him. Thence to Westminster, to the Painted Chamber, and there
met the two Joyces. Will in a very melancholy taking. After a little
discourse I to the Lords’ House before they sat; and stood within it
a good while, while the Duke of York came to me and spoke to me a good
while about the new ship’ at Woolwich. Afterwards I spoke with my Lord
Barkeley and my Lord Peterborough about it. And so staid without a good
while, and saw my Lady Peters, an impudent jade, soliciting all the
Lords on her behalf. And at last W. Joyce was called in; and by the
consequences, and what my Lord Peterborough told me, I find that he did
speak all he said to his disadvantage, and so was committed to the Black
Rod: which is very hard, he doing what he did by the advice of my Lord
Peters’ own steward. But the Sergeant of the Black Rod did direct one of
his messengers to take him in custody, and so he was peaceably conducted
to the Swan with two Necks, in Tuttle Street, to a handsome dining-room;
and there was most civilly used, my uncle Fenner, and his brother
Anthony, and some other friends being with him. But who would have
thought that the fellow that I should have sworn could have spoken
before all the world should in this be so daunted, as not to know what
he said, and now to cry like a child. I protest, it is very strange to
observe. I left them providing for his stay there to-night and getting a
petition against tomorrow, and so away to Westminster Hall, and meeting
Mr. Coventry, he took me to his chamber, with Sir William Hickeman, a
member of their House, and a very civill gentleman. Here we dined very
plentifully, and thence to White Hall to the Duke’s, where we all met,
and after some discourse of the condition of the Fleete, in order to a
Dutch warr, for that, I perceive, the Duke hath a mind it should
come to, we away to the office, where we sat, and I took care to rise
betimes, and so by water to Halfway House, talking all the way good
discourse with Mr. Wayth, and there found my wife, who was gone with her
mayd Besse to have a walk. But, Lord! how my jealous mind did make me
suspect that she might have some appointment to meet somebody. But I
found the poor souls coming away thence, so I took them back, and eat
and drank, and then home, and after at the office a while, I home to
supper and to bed. It was a sad sight, me thought, to-day to see my Lord
Peters coming out of the House fall out with his lady (from whom he is
parted) about this business; saying that she disgraced him. But she hath
been a handsome woman, and is, it seems, not only a lewd woman, but very
high-spirited.