9th. Up and to the office, where sat all the morning. At noon by coach
with Mr. Coventry to the ‘Change, where busy with several people.
Great talke of the Dutch proclaiming themselves in India, Lords of the
Southern Seas, and deny traffick there to all ships but their owne, upon
pain of confiscation; which makes our merchants mad. Great doubt of two
ships of ours, the “Greyhound” and another, very rich, coming from the
Streights, for fear of the Turkes. Matters are made up between the Pope
and the King of France; so that now all the doubt is, what the French
will do with their armies. Thence home, and there found Captain Grove in
mourning for his wife, and Hawly, and they dined with me. After dinner,
and Grove gone, Hawly and I talked of his mistress, Mrs. Lane, and I
seriously advising him and inquiring his condition, and do believe that
I shall bring them together. By and by comes Mr. Moore, with whom much
good discourse of my Lord, and among other things told me that my Lord
is mightily altered, that is, grown very high and stately, and do not
admit of any to come into his chamber to him, as heretofore, and that I
must not think much of his strangeness to me, for it was the same he
do to every body, and that he would not have me be solicitous in the
matter, but keep off and give him now and then a visit and no more, for
he says he himself do not go to him now a days but when he sends
for him, nor then do not stay for him if he be not there at the hour
appointed, for, says he, I do find that I can stand upon my own legs
and I will not by any over submission make myself cheap to any body and
contemptible, which was the doctrine of the world that I lacked most,
and shall follow it. I discoursed with him about my money that my Lord
hath, and the L1000 that I stand bound with him in, to my cozen Thomas
Pepys, in both which I will get myself at liberty as soon as I can;
for I do not like his being angry and in debt both together to me; and
besides, I do not perceive he looks after paying his debts, but runs
farther and farther in. He being gone, my wife and I did walk an houre
or two above in our chamber, seriously talking of businesses. I told
her my Lord owed me L700, and shewed her the bond, and how I intended
to carry myself to my Lord. She and I did cast about how to get Captain
Grove for my sister, in which we are mighty earnest at present, and I
think it would be a good match, and will endeavour it. So to my office a
while, then home to supper and to bed.