8th. Up betimes and to the office, and anon, it begunn to be fair after
a great shower this morning, Sir W. Batten and I by water (calling his
son Castle by the way, between whom and I no notice at all of his letter
the other day to me) to Deptford, and after a turn in the yard, I went
with him to the Almes’-house to see the new building which he, with
some ambition, is building of there, during his being Master of Trinity
House; and a good worke it is, but to see how simply he answered
somebody concerning setting up the arms of the corporation upon the
door, that and any thing else he did not deny it, but said he would
leave that to the master that comes after him. There I left him and to
the King’s yard again, and there made good inquiry into the business of
the poop lanterns, wherein I found occasion to correct myself mightily
for what I have done in the contract with the platerer, and am resolved,
though I know not how, to make them to alter it, though they signed it
last night, and so I took Stanes

     [Among the State Papers is a petition of Thomas Staine to the Navy
     Commissioners “for employment as plateworker in one or two
     dockyards.  Has incurred ill-will by discovering abuses in the great
     rates given by the king for several things in the said trade.  Begs
     the appointment, whereby it will be seen who does the work best and
     cheapest, otherwise he and all others will be discouraged from
     discovering abuses in future, with order thereon for a share of the
     work to be given to him”  (“Calendar,” Domestic, 1663-64, p. 395)]

home with me by boat and discoursed it, and he will come to reason when
I can make him to understand it. No sooner landed but it fell a mighty
storm of rain and hail, so I put into a cane shop and bought one to walk
with, cost me 4s. 6d., all of one joint. So home to dinner, and had an
excellent Good Friday dinner of peas porridge and apple pye. So to the
office all the afternoon preparing a new book for my contracts, and this
afternoon come home the office globes done to my great content. In the
evening a little to visit Sir W. Pen, who hath a feeling this day or two
of his old pain. Then to walk in the garden with my wife, and so to my
office a while, and then home to the only Lenten supper I have had of
wiggs--[Buns or teacakes.]--and ale, and so to bed. This morning betimes
came to my office to me boatswain Smith of Woolwich, telling me a
notable piece of knavery of the officers of the yard and Mr. Gold in
behalf of a contract made for some old ropes by Mr. Wood, and I believe
I shall find Sir W. Batten of the plot (vide my office daybook).

     [These note-books referred to in the Diary are not known to exist
     now.]