29th. Up and by coach with Sir W. Pen to Charing Cross, and there I
‘light, and to Sir Phillip Warwick to visit him and discourse with him
about navy business, which I did at large and he most largely with me,
not only about the navy but about the general Revenue of England, above
two hours, I think, many staying all the while without, but he seemed
to take pains to let me either understand the affairs of the Revenue or
else to be a witness of his pains and care in stating it. He showed me
indeed many excellent collections of the State of the Revenue in former
Kings and the late times, and the present. He showed me how the very
Assessments between 1643 and 1659, which were taxes (besides Excise,
Customes, Sequestrations, Decimations, King and Queene’s and Church
Lands, or any thing else but just the Assessments), come to above
fifteen millions. He showed me a discourse of his concerning the
Revenues of this and foreign States. How that of Spayne was great, but
divided with his kingdoms, and so came to little. How that of France
did, and do much exceed ours before for quantity; and that it is at the
will of the Prince to tax what he will upon his people; which is not
here. That the Hollanders have the best manner of tax, which is only
upon the expence of provisions, by an excise; and do conclude that no
other tax is proper for England but a pound-rate, or excise upon the
expence of provisions. He showed me every particular sort of payment
away of money, since the King’s coming in, to this day; and told me,
from one to one, how little he hath received of profit from most of
them; and I believe him truly. That the L1,200,000 which the Parliament
with so much ado did first vote to give the King, and since hath been
reexamined by several committees of the present Parliament, is yet above
L300,000 short of making up really to the King the L1,200,000, as by
particulars he showed me.

     [A committee was appointed in September, 1660, to consider the
     subject of the King’s revenue, and they “reported to the Commons that
     the average revenue of Charles I., from 1637 to 1641 inclusive, had
     been L895,819, and the average expenditure about L1,110,000.  At
     that time prices were lower and the country less burthened with navy
     and garrisons, among which latter Dunkirk alone now cost more than
     L100,000 a year.  It appeared, therefore, that the least sum to
     which the King could be expected to ‘conform his expense’ was
     L1,200,000.”  Burnet writes, “It was believed that if two millions
     had been asked he could have carried it.  But he (Clarendon) had no
     mind to put the King out of the necessity of having recourse to his
     Parliament.”--Lister’s Life of Clarendon, vol. ii., pp.  22, 23.]

And in my Lord Treasurer’s excellent letter to the King upon this
subject, he tells the King how it was the spending more than the revenue
that did give the first occasion of his father’s ruine, and did since
to the rebels; who, he says, just like Henry the Eighth, had great and
sudden increase of wealth, but yet, by overspending, both died poor; and
further tells the King how much of this L1,200,000 depends upon the
life of the Prince, and so must be renewed by Parliament again to
his successor; which is seldom done without parting with some of the
prerogatives of the Crowne; or if denied and he persists to take it of
the people, it gives occasion to a civill war, which may, as it did in
the late business of tonnage and poundage, prove fatal to the Crowne. He
showed me how many ways the Lord Treasurer did take before he moved the
King to farme the Customes in the manner he do, and the reasons that
moved him to do it. He showed the a very excellent argument to prove,
that our importing lesse than we export, do not impoverish the kingdom,
according to the received opinion: which, though it be a paradox, and
that I do not remember the argument, yet methought there was a great
deale in what he said. And upon the whole I find him a most exact and
methodicall man, and of great industry: and very glad that he thought
fit to show me all this; though I cannot easily guess the reason why he
should do it to me, unless from the plainness that he sees I use to
him in telling him how much the King may suffer for our want of
understanding the case of our Treasury. Thence to White Hall (where
my Lord Sandwich was, and gave me a good countenance, I thought),
and before the Duke did our usual business, and so I about several
businesses in the house, and then out to the Mewes with Sir W. Pen. But
in my way first did meet with W. Howe, who did of himself advise me to
appear more free with my Lord and to come to him, for my own strangeness
he tells me he thinks do make my Lord the worse. At the Mewes Sir W. Pen
and Mr. Baxter did shew me several good horses, but Pen, which Sir W.
Pen did give the Duke of York, was given away by the Duke the other day
to a Frenchman, which Baxter is cruelly vexed at, saying that he was the
best horse that he expects a great while to have to do with. Thence I
to the ‘Change, and thence to a Coffee-house with Sir W. Warren, and did
talk much about his and Wood’s business, and thence homewards, and in my
way did stay to look upon a fire in an Inneyard in Lumbard Streete. But,
Lord! how the mercers and merchants who had warehouses there did carry
away their cloths and silks. But at last it was quenched, and I home to
dinner, and after dinner carried my wife and set her and her two mayds
in Fleete Streete to buy things, and I to White Hall to little purpose,
and so to Westminster Hall, and there talked with Mrs. Lane and Howlett,
but the match with Hawly I perceive will not take, and so I am resolved
wholly to avoid occasion of further ill with her. Thence by water to
Salsbury Court, and found my wife, by agreement, at Mrs. Turner’s,
and after a little stay and chat set her and young Armiger down in
Cheapside, and so my wife and I home. Got home before our mayds, who by
and by came with a great cry and fright that they had like to have been
killed by a coach; but, Lord! to see how Jane did tell the story like a
foole and a dissembling fanatique, like her grandmother, but so like a
changeling, would make a man laugh to death almost, and yet be vexed to
hear her. By and by to the office to make up my monthly accounts, which
I make up to-night, and to my great content find myself worth eight
hundred and ninety and odd pounds, the greatest sum I ever yet knew, and
so with a heart at great case to bed.