19th. Up in good order in my head again and shaved myself, and then to
the office, whither Mr. Cutler came, and walked and talked with me a
great while; and then to the ‘Change together; and it being early, did
tell me several excellent examples of men raised upon the ‘Change by
their great diligence and saving; as also his owne fortune, and how
credit grew upon him; that when he was not really worth L1100, he had
credit for L100,000 of Sir W. Rider how he rose; and others. By and by
joyned with us Sir John Bankes; who told us several passages of the East
India Company; and how in his very case, when there was due to him and
Alderman Mico L64,000 from the Dutch for injury done to them in the East
Indys, Oliver presently after the peace, they delaying to pay them the
money, sent them word, that if they did not pay them by such a day, he
would grant letters of mark to those merchants against them; by which
they were so fearful of him, they did presently pay the money every
farthing. By and by, the ‘Change filling, I did many businesses, and
about 2 o’clock went off with my uncle Wight to his house, thence by
appointment we took our wives (they by coach with Mr. Mawes) and we
on foot to Mr. Jaggard, a salter, in Thames Street, for whom I did a
courtesy among the poor victuallers, his wife, whom long ago I had seen,
being daughter to old Day, my uncle Wight’s master, is a very plain
woman, but pretty children they have. They live methought at first in
but a plain way, but afterward I saw their dinner, all fish, brought in
very neatly, but the company being but bad I had no great pleasure in
it. After dinner I to the office, where we should have met upon business
extraordinary, but business not coming we broke up, and I thither again
and took my wife; and taking a coach, went to visit my Ladys Jemimah
and Paulina Montagu, and Mrs. Elizabeth Dickering, whom we find at their
father’s new house

     [The Earl of Sandwich had just moved to a house in Lincoln’s Inn
     Fields.  Elizabeth Dickering, who afterwards married John Creed, was
     niece to Lord Sandwich.]

in Lincolne’s Inn Fields; but the house all in dirt. They received us
well enough; but I did not endeavour to carry myself over familiarly
with them; and so after a little stay, there coming in presently after
us my Lady Aberguenny and other ladies, we back again by coach, and
visited, my wife did, my she cozen Scott, who is very ill still, and
thence to Jaggard’s again, where a very good supper and great store of
plate; and above all after supper Mrs. Jaggard did at my entreaty play
on the Vyall, but so well as I did not think any woman in England could
and but few Maisters, I must confess it did mightily surprise me, though
I knew heretofore that she could play, but little thought so well. After
her I set Maes to singing, but he did it so like a coxcomb that I was
sick of him. About 11 at night I carried my aunt home by coach, and then
home myself, having set my wife down at home by the way. My aunt tells
me they are counted very rich people, worth at least 10 or L12,000, and
their country house all the yeare long and all things liveable, which
mightily surprises me to think for how poore a man I took him when I
did him the courtesy at our office. So after prayers to bed, pleased at
nothing all the day but Mrs. Jaggard playing on the Vyall, and that was
enough to make me bear with all the rest that did not content me.