3rd. Up, and after a long discourse with my cozen Thomas Pepys, the
executor, I with my wife by coach to Holborn, where I ‘light, and she to
her father’s, I to the Temple and several places, and so to the ‘Change,
where much business, and then home to dinner alone; and so to the Mitre
Taverne by appointment (and there met by chance with W. Howe come to buy
wine for my Lord against his going down to Hinchingbroke, and I private
with him a great while discoursing of my Lord’s strangeness to me; but
he answers that I have no reason to think any such thing, but that my
Lord is only in general a more reserved man than he was before) to
meet Sir W. Rider and Mr. Clerke, and there after much ado made an end,
giving Mr. Custos L202 against Mr. Bland, which I endeavoured to bring
down but could not, and think it is well enough ended for Mr. Bland for
all that. Thence by coach to fetch my wife from her brother’s, and found
her gone home. Called at Sir Robert Bernard’s about surrendering my
estate in reversion to the use of my life, which will be done, and at
Roger Pepys, who was gone to bed in pain of a boyle that he could not
sit or stand. So home, where my wife is full of sad stories of her
good-natured father and roguish brother, who is going for Holland and
his wife, to be a soldier. And so after a little at the office to bed.
This night late coming in my coach, coming up Ludgate Hill, I saw two
gallants and their footmen taking a pretty wench, which I have much
eyed, lately set up shop upon the hill, a seller of riband and gloves.
They seek to drag her by some force, but the wench went, and I believe
had her turn served, but, God forgive me! what thoughts and wishes I had
of being in their place. In Covent Garden to-night, going to fetch home
my wife, I stopped at the great Coffee-house’ there, where I never was
before; where Dryden the poet (I knew at Cambridge), and all the wits of
the town, and Harris the player, and Mr. Hoole of our College. And had I
had time then, or could at ether times, it will be good coming thither,
for there, I perceive, is very witty and pleasant discourse. But I could
not tarry, and as it was late, they were all ready to go away.