January 1st, Went to bed between 4 and 5 in the morning with my mind
in good temper of satisfaction and slept till about 8, that many people
came to speak with me. Among others one came with the best New Year’s
gift that ever I had, namely from Mr. Deering, with a bill of exchange
drawn upon himself for the payment of L50 to Mr. Luellin. It being for
my use with a letter of compliment. I am not resolved what or how to do
in this business, but I conclude it is an extraordinary good new year’s
gift, though I do not take the whole, or if I do then give some of it to
Luellin. By and by comes Captain Allen and his son Jowles and his wife,
who continues pretty still. They would have had me set my hand to a
certificate for his loyalty, and I know not what his ability for any
employment. But I did not think it fit, but did give them a pleasing
denial, and after sitting with me an hour they went away. Several others
came to me about business, and then being to dine at my uncle Wight’s
I went to the Coffee-house, sending my wife by Will, and there staid
talking an hour with Coll. Middleton, and others, and among other things
about a very rich widow, young and handsome, of one Sir Nicholas Gold’s,
a merchant, lately fallen, and of great courtiers that already look
after her: her husband not dead a week yet. She is reckoned worth
L80,000. Thence to my uncle Wight’s, where Dr. of-----, among others,
dined, and his wife, a seeming proud conceited woman, I know not what to
make of her, but the Dr’s. discourse did please me very well about the
disease of the stone, above all things extolling Turpentine, which he
told me how it may be taken in pills with great ease. There was brought
to table a hot pie made of a swan I sent them yesterday, given me by Mr.
Howe, but we did not eat any of it. But my wife and I rose from table,
pretending business, and went to the Duke’s house, the first play I have
been at these six months, according to my last vowe, and here saw the
so much cried-up play of “Henry the Eighth;” which, though I went with
resolution to like it, is so simple a thing made up of a great many
patches, that, besides the shows and processions in it, there is nothing
in the world good or well done. Thence mightily dissatisfied back at
night to my uncle Wight’s, and supped with them, but against my stomach
out of the offence the sight of my aunt’s hands gives me, and ending
supper with a mighty laugh, the greatest I have had these many months,
at my uncle’s being out in his grace after meat, we rose and broke up,
and my wife and I home and to bed, being sleepy since last night.