25th. Up and to the office after I had spoke to my taylor, Langford (who
came to me about some work), desiring to know whether he knew of any
debts that my father did owe of his own in the City. He tells me, “No,
not any.” I did on purpose try him because of what words he and his wife
have said of him (as Herbert told me the other day), and further did
desire him, that if he knew of any or could hear of any that he should
bid them come to me, and I would pay them, for I would not that because
he do not pay my brother’s debts that therefore he should be thought
to deny the payment of his owne. All the morning at the office busy. At
noon to the ‘Change, among other things busy to get a little by the hire
of a ship for Tangier. So home to dinner, and after dinner comes
Mr. Cooke to see me; it is true he was kind to me at sea in carrying
messages to and fro to my wife from sea, but I did do him kindnesses
too, and therefore I matter not much to compliment or make any regard
of his thinking me to slight him as I do for his folly about my brother
Tom’s mistress. After dinner and some talk with him, I to my office;
there busy, till by and by Jacke Noble came to me to tell me that he had
Cave in prison, and that he would give me and my father good security
that neither we nor any of our family should be troubled with the child;
for he could prove that he was fully satisfied for him; and that if the
worst came to the worst, the parish must keep it; that Cave did bring
the child to his house, but they got it carried back again, and that
thereupon he put him in prison. When he saw that I would not pay him
the money, nor made anything of being secured against the child, he then
said that then he must go to law, not himself, but come in as a witness
for Cave against us. I could have told him that he could bear witness
that Cave is satisfied, or else there is no money due to himself; but
I let alone any such discourse, only getting as much out of him as I
could. I perceive he is a rogue, and hath inquired into everything and
consulted with Dr. Pepys, and that he thinks as Dr. Pepys told him that
my father if he could would not pay a farthing of the debts, and yet I
made him confess that in all his lifetime he never knew my father to be
asked for money twice, nay, not once, all the time he lived with him,
and that for his own debts he believed he would do so still, but he
meant only for those of Tom. He said now that Randall and his wife and
the midwife could prove from my brother’s own mouth that the child was
his, and that Tom had told them the circumstances of time, upon November