20th. It having been a very cold night last night I had got some cold,
and so in pain by wind, and a sure precursor of pain is sudden letting
off farts, and when that stops, then my passages stop and my pain
begins. Up and did several businesses, and so with my wife by water to
White Hall, she to her father’s, I to the Duke, where we did our usual
business. And among other discourse of the Dutch, he was merrily saying
how they print that Prince Rupert, Duke of Albemarle, and my Lord
Sandwich, are to be Generalls; and soon after is to follow them “Vieux
Pen;” and so the Duke called him in mirth Old Pen. They have, it seems,
lately wrote to the King, to assure him that their setting-out ships
were only to defend their fishing-trade, and to stay near home, not to
annoy the King’s subjects; and to desire that he would do the like with
his ships: which the King laughs at, but yet is troubled they should
think him such a child, to suffer them to bring home their fish and East
India Company’s ships, and then they will not care a fart for us. Thence
to Westminster Hall, it being term time, meeting Mr. Dickering, he tells
me how my Lady last week went to see Mrs. Becke, the mother; and by and
by the daughter came in, but that my Lady do say herself, as he says,
that she knew not for what reason, for she never knew they had a
daughter, which I do not believe. She was troubled, and her heart did
rise as soon as she appeared, and seems the most ugly woman that ever
she saw. This if true were strange, but I believe it is not. Thence to
my Lord’s lodgings; and were merry with the young ladies, who make a
great story of their appearing before their mother the morning after we
carried them, the last week, home so late; and that their mother took it
very well, at least without any anger. Here I heard how the rich widow,
my Lady Gold, is married to one Neale, after he had received a box on
the eare by her brother (who was there a sentinel, in behalf of some
courtier) at the door; but made him draw, and wounded him. She called
Neale up to her, and sent for a priest, married presently, and went to
bed. The brother sent to the Court, and had a serjeant sent for Neale;
but Neale sent for him up to be seen in bed, and she owned him for her
husband: and so all is past. It seems Sir H. Bennet did look after her.
My Lady very pleasant. After dinner came in Sir Thomas Crew and Mr.
Sidney, lately come from France, who is growne a little, and a pretty
youth he is; but not so improved as they did give him out to be, but
like a child still. But yet I can perceive he hath good parts and good
inclinations. Thence with Creed, who dined here, to Westminster to find
out Mr. Hawly, and did, but he did not accept of my offer of his being
steward to my Lord at sea. Thence alone to several places about my law
businesses, and with good success; at last I to Mr. Townsend at the
Wardrobe, and received kind words from him to be true to me against
Captain Ferrers his endeavours to get the place from my father as my
Lord hath promised him. Here met Will. Howe, and he went forth with me;
and by water back to White Hall to wait on my Lord, who is come back
from Hinchinbroke; where he has been about 4 or 5 days. But I was never
more vexed to see how an over-officious visitt is received, for
he received me with as little concernment as in the middle of his
discontent, and a fool I am to be of so servile a humour, and vexed with
that consideration I took coach home, and could not get it off my mind
all night. To supper and to bed, my wife finding fault with Besse for
her calling upon Jane that lived with us, and there heard Mrs. Harper
and her talk ill of us and not told us of it. With which I was also
vexed, and told her soundly of it till she cried, poor wench, and I hope
without dissimulation, and yet I cannot tell; however, I was glad to see
in what manner she received it, and so to sleep.