12th. Up, and ready, did find below Mr. Creed’s boy with a letter from
his master for me. So I fell to reading it, and it is by way of stating
the case between S. Pepys and J. Creed most excellently writ, both
showing his stoutness and yet willingness to peace, reproaching me yet
flattering me again, and in a word in as good a manner as I think the
world could have wrote, and indeed put me to a greater stand than ever
I thought I could have been in this matter. All the morning thinking
how to behave myself in the business, and at noon to the Coffee-house;
thence by his appointment met him upon the ‘Change, and with him back to
the Coffee-house, where with great seriousness and strangeness on both
sides he said his part and I mine, he sometimes owning my favour and
assistance, yet endeavouring to lessen it, as that the success of his
business was not wholly or very much to be imputed to that assistance: I
to alledge the contrary, and plainly to tell him that from the beginning
I never had it in my mind to do him all that kindnesse for nothing, but
he gaining 5 or L600, I did expect a share of it, at least a real and
not a complimentary acknowledgment of it. In fine I said nothing all the
while that I need fear he can do me more hurt with them than before I
spoke them. The most I told him was after we were come to a peace, which
he asked me whether he should answer the Board’s letter or no. I told
him he might forbear it a while and no more. Then he asked how the
letter could be signed by them without their much enquiry. I told him
it was as I worded it and nothing at all else of any moment, whether my
words be ever hereafter spoken of again or no. So that I have the same
neither better nor worse force over him that I had before, if he should
not do his part. And the peace between us was this: Says he after
all, well, says he, I know you will expect, since there must be some
condescension, that it do become me to begin it, and therefore, says he,
I do propose (just like the interstice between the death of the old and
the coming in of the present king, all the time is swallowed up as if
it had never been) so our breach of friendship may be as if it had never
been, that I should lay aside all misapprehensions of him or his first
letter, and that he would reckon himself obliged to show the same
ingenuous acknowledgment of my love and service to him as at the
beginning he ought to have done, before by my first letter I did (as he
well observed) put him out of a capacity of doing it, without seeming
to do it servilely, and so it rests, and I shall expect how he will deal
with me. After that I began to be free, and both of us to discourse of
other things, and he went home with me and dined with me and my wife
and very pleasant, having a good dinner and the opening of my lampry
(cutting a notch on one side), which proved very good. After dinner he
and I to Deptford, walking all the way, where we met Sir W. Petty and I
took him back, and I got him to go with me to his vessel and discourse
it over to me, which he did very well, and then walked back together to
the waterside at Redriffe, with good discourse all the way. So Creed and
I by boat to my house, and thence to coach with my wife and called at
Alderman Backewell’s and there changed Mr. Falconer’s state-cup, that he
did give us the other day, for a fair tankard. The cup weighed with the
fashion L5 16s., and another little cup that Joyce Norton did give us