21st. Up pretty betimes and to my office, and thither came by and by Mr.
Vernaty and staid two hours with me, but Mr. Gauden did not come, and so
he went away to meet again anon. Then comes Mr. Creed, and, after some
discourse, he and I and my wife by coach to Westminster (leaving her at
Unthanke’s, her tailor’s) Hall, and there at the Lords’ House heard that
it is ordered, that, upon submission upon the knee both to the House and
my Lady Peters, W. Joyce shall be released. I forthwith made him submit,
and aske pardon upon his knees; which he did before several Lords. But
my Lady would not hear it; but swore she would post the Lords, that the
world might know what pitifull Lords the King hath; and that revenge was
sweeter to her than milk; and that she would never be satisfied unless
he stood in a pillory, and demand pardon there. But I perceive the Lords
are ashamed of her, and so I away calling with my wife at a place or two
to inquire after a couple of mayds recommended to us, but we found
both of them bad. So set my wife at my uncle Wight’s and I home, and
presently to the ‘Change, where I did some business, and thence to my
uncle’s and there dined very well, and so to the office, we sat all the
afternoon, but no sooner sat but news comes my Lady Sandwich was come to
see us, so I went out, and running up (her friend however before me) I
perceive by my dear Lady blushing that in my dining-room she was doing
something upon the pott, which I also was ashamed of, and so fell to
some discourse, but without pleasure through very pity to my Lady. She
tells me, and I find true since, that the House this day have voted that
the King be desired to demand right for the wrong done us by the Dutch,
and that they will stand by him with their lives fortunes: which is a
very high vote, and more than I expected. What the issue will be, God
knows! My Lady, my wife not being at home, did not stay, but, poor, good
woman, went away, I being mightily taken with her dear visitt, and so to
the office, where all the afternoon till late, and so to my office, and
then to supper and to bed, thinking to rise betimes tomorrow.