3rd. Was called up about four o’clock and in the darke by lanthorne took
boat and to the Ketch and set sayle, sleeping a little in the Cabbin
till day and then up and fell to reading of Mr. Evelyn’s book about
Paynting,

     [This must surely have been Evelyn’s “Sculptura, or the History and
     Art of Chalcography and Engraving in Copper,” published in 1662.
     The translation of Freart’s “Idea of the Perfection of Painting
     demonstrated” was not published until 1668.]

which is a very pretty book. Carrying good victuals and Tom with me I to
breakfast about 9 o’clock, and then to read again and come to the Fleete
about twelve, where I found my Lord (the Prince being gone in) on board
the Royall James, Sir Thomas Allen commander, and with my Lord an houre
alone discoursing what was my chief and only errand about what was
adviseable for his Lordship to do in this state of things, himself being
under the Duke of Yorke’s and Mr. Coventry’s envy, and a great many more
and likely never to do anything honourably but he shall be envied and
the honour taken as much as can be from it. His absence lessens his
interest at Court, and what is worst we never able to set out a fleete
fit for him to command, or, if out, to keepe them out or fit them to do
any great thing, or if that were so yet nobody at home minds him or
his condition when he is abroad, and lastly the whole affairs of state
looking as if they would all on a sudden break in pieces, and then what
a sad thing it would be for him to be out of the way. My Lord did concur
in every thing and thanked me infinitely for my visit and counsel,
telling me that in every thing he concurs, but puts a query, what if the
King will not think himself safe, if any man should go but him. How he
should go off then? To that I had no answer ready, but the making the
King see that he may be of as good use to him here while another goes
forth. But for that I am not able to say much. We after this talked of
some other little things and so to dinner, where my Lord infinitely kind
to me, and after dinner I rose and left him with some Commanders at the
table taking tobacco and I took the Bezan back with me, and with a brave
gale and tide reached up that night to the Hope, taking great pleasure
in learning the seamen’s manner of singing when they sound the depths,
and then to supper and to sleep, which I did most excellently all night,
it being a horrible foule night for wind and raine.