18th. By break of day we come to within sight of the fleete, which was a
very fine thing to behold, being above 100 ships, great and small; with
the flag-ships of each squadron, distinguished by their several flags on
their main, fore, or mizen masts. Among others, the Soveraigne, Charles,
and Prince; in the last of which my Lord Sandwich was. When we called by
her side his Lordshipp was not stirring, so we come to anchor a little
below his ship, thinking to have rowed on board him, but the wind and
tide was so strong against us that we could not get up to him, no,
though rowed by a boat of the Prince’s that come to us to tow us up; at
last however he brought us within a little way, and then they flung
out a rope to us from the Prince and so come on board, but with great
trouble and tune and patience, it being very cold; we find my Lord newly
up in his night-gown very well. He received us kindly; telling us the
state of the fleet, lacking provisions, having no beer at all, nor
have had most of them these three weeks or month, and but few days’ dry
provisions. And indeed he tells us that he believes no fleete was ever
set to sea in so ill condition of provision, as this was when it went
out last. He did inform us in the business of Bergen,

     [Lord Sandwich was not so successful in convincing other people as
     to the propriety of his conduct at Bergen as he was with Pepys.]

so as to let us see how the judgment of the world is not to be depended
on in things they know not; it being a place just wide enough, and not
so much hardly, for ships to go through to it, the yardarmes sticking in
the very rocks. He do not, upon his best enquiry, find reason to except
against any part of the management of the business by Teddiman; he
having staid treating no longer than during the night, whiles he was
fitting himself to fight, bringing his ship a-breast, and not a quarter
of an hour longer (as is said); nor could more ships have been brought
to play, as is thought. Nor could men be landed, there being 10,000 men
effectively always in armes of the Danes; nor, says he, could we expect
more from the Dane than he did, it being impossible to set fire on the
ships but it must burn the towne. But that wherein the Dane did amisse
is, that he did assist them, the Dutch, all the while, while he was
treating with us, while he should have been neutrall to us both. But,
however, he did demand but the treaty of us; which is, that we should
not come with more than five ships. A flag of truce is said, and
confessed by my Lord, that he believes it was hung out; but while they
did hang it out, they did shoot at us; so that it was not either seen
perhaps, or fit to cease upon sight of it, while they continued actually
in action against us. But the main thing my Lord wonders at, and
condemns the Dane for, is, that the blockhead, who is so much in debt
to the Hollander, having now a treasure more by much than all his Crowne
was worth, and that which would for ever have beggared the Hollanders,
should not take this time to break with the Hollander, and, thereby
paid his debt which must have been forgiven him, and got the greatest
treasure into his hands that ever was together in the world. By and by
my Lord took me aside to discourse of his private matters, who was very
free with me touching the ill condition of the fleete that it hath been
in, and the good fortune that he hath had, and nothing else that these
prizes are to be imputed to. He also talked with me about Mr. Coventry’s
dealing with him in sending Sir W. Pen away before him, which was not
fair nor kind; but that he hath mastered and cajoled Sir W. Pen, that he
hath been able to do, nothing in the fleete, but been obedient to him;
but withal tells me he is a man that is but of very mean parts, and a
fellow not to be lived with, so false and base he is; which I know well
enough to be very true, and did, as I had formerly done, give my Lord my
knowledge of him. By and by was called a Council of Warr on board, when
come Sir W. Pen there, and Sir Christopher Mings, Sir Edward Spragg,
Sir Jos. Jordan, Sir Thomas Teddiman, and Sir Roger Cuttance, and so the
necessity of the fleete for victuals, clothes, and money was discoursed,
but by the discourse there of all but my Lord, that is to say, the
counterfeit grave nonsense of Sir W. Pen and the poor mean discourse
of the rest, methinks I saw how the government and management of the
greatest business of the three nations is committed to very ordinary
heads, saving my Lord, and in effect is only upon him, who is able to do
what he pleases with them, they not having the meanest degree of reason
to be able to oppose anything that he says, and so I fear it is ordered
but like all the rest of the King’s publique affayres. The council being
up they most of them went away, only Sir W. Pen who staid to dine there
and did so, but the wind being high the ship (though the motion of it
was hardly discernible to the eye) did make me sick, so as I could not
eat any thing almost. After dinner Cocke did pray me to helpe him to
L500 of W. How, who is deputy Treasurer, wherein my Lord Bruncker and I
am to be concerned and I did aske it my Lord, and he did consent to have
us furnished with L500, and I did get it paid to Sir Roger Cuttance
and Mr. Pierce in part for above L1000 worth of goods, Mace, Nutmegs,
Cynamon, and Cloves, and he tells us we may hope to get L1500 by it,
which God send! Great spoil, I hear, there hath been of the two East
India ships, and that yet they will come in to the King very rich: so
that I hope this journey will be worth L100 to me.

     [There is a shorthand journal of proceedings relating to Pepys’s
     purchase of some East India prize goods among the Rawlinson MSS. in
     the Bodleian Library.]

After having paid this money, we took leave of my Lord and so to our
Yacht again, having seen many of my friends there. Among others I hear
that W. Howe will grow very rich by this last business and grows very
proud and insolent by it; but it is what I ever expected. I hear by
every body how much my poor Lord of Sandwich was concerned for me during
my silence a while, lest I had been dead of the plague in this sickly
time. No sooner come into the yacht, though overjoyed with the good
work we have done to-day, but I was overcome with sea sickness so that
I begun to spue soundly, and so continued a good while, till at last I
went into the cabbin and shutting my eyes my trouble did cease that I
fell asleep, which continued till we come into Chatham river where the
water was smooth, and then I rose and was very well, and the tide coming
to be against us we did land before we come to Chatham and walked
a mile, having very good discourse by the way, it being dark and it
beginning to rain just as we got thither. At Commissioner Pett’s we did
eat and drink very well and very merry we were, and about 10 at night,
it being moonshine and very cold, we set out, his coach carrying us, and
so all night travelled to Greenwich, we sometimes sleeping a little and
then talking and laughing by the way, and with much pleasure, but
that it was very horrible cold, that I was afeard of an ague. A pretty
passage was that the coach stood of a sudden and the coachman come
down and the horses stirring, he cried, Hold! which waked me, and the
coach[man] standing at the boote to [do] something or other and crying,
Hold! I did wake of a sudden and not knowing who he was, nor thinking of
the coachman between sleeping and waking I did take up the heart to take
him by the shoulder, thinking verily he had been a thief. But when I
waked I found my cowardly heart to discover a fear within me and that I
should never have done it if I had been awake.