30th. Up and to the office, where busy all the morning, and at noon with
Sir W. Batten to Coll. Cleggat to dinner, being invited, where a very
pretty dinner to my full content and very merry. The great burden we
have upon us at this time at the office, is the providing for prisoners
and sicke men that are recovered, they lying before our office doors
all night and all day, poor wretches. Having been on shore, the captains
won’t receive them on board, and other ships we have not to put them
on, nor money to pay them off, or provide for them. God remove this
difficulty! This made us followed all the way to this gentleman’s
house and there are waited for our coming out after dinner. Hither come
Luellin to me and would force me to take Mr. Deering’s 20 pieces in
gold he did offer me a good while since, which I did, yet really and
sincerely against my will and content, I seeing him a man not likely to
do well in his business, nor I to reap any comfort in having to do with,
and be beholden to, a man that minds more his pleasure and company than
his business. Thence mighty merry and much pleased with the dinner and
company and they with me I parted and there was set upon by the poor
wretches, whom I did give good words and some little money to, and the
poor people went away like lambs, and in good earnest are not to be
censured if their necessities drive them to bad courses of stealing or
the like, while they lacke wherewith to live. Thence to the office, and
there wrote a letter or two and dispatched a little business, and then
to Captain Cocke’s, where I find Mr. Temple, the fat blade, Sir Robert.
Viner’s chief man. And we three and two companions of his in the evening
by agreement took ship in the Bezan and the tide carried us no further
than Woolwich about 8 at night, and so I on shore to my wife, and
there to my great trouble find my wife out of order, and she took me
downstairs and there alone did tell me her falling out with both her
mayds and particularly Mary, and how Mary had to her teeth told her she
would tell me of something that should stop her mouth and words of that
sense. Which I suspect may be about Brown, but my wife prays me to
call it to examination, and this, I being of myself jealous, do make me
mightily out of temper, and seeing it not fit to enter into the dispute
did passionately go away, thinking to go on board again. But when I come
to the stairs I considered the Bezan would not go till the next ebb,
and it was best to lie in a good bed and, it may be, get myself into
a better humour by being with my wife. So I back again and to bed and
having otherwise so many reasons to rejoice and hopes of good profit,
besides considering the ill that trouble of mind and melancholly may in
this sickly time bring a family into, and that if the difference were
never so great, it is not a time to put away servants, I was resolved
to salve up the business rather than stir in it, and so become pleasant
with my wife and to bed, minding nothing of this difference. So to sleep
with a good deal of content, and saving only this night and a day or two
about the same business a month or six weeks ago, I do end this month
with the greatest content, and may say that these last three months,
for joy, health, and profit, have been much the greatest that ever I
received in all my life in any twelve months almost in my life, having
nothing upon me but the consideration of the sicklinesse of the season
during this great plague to mortify mee. For all which the Lord God be
praised!