23rd. Up, and after doing some business I down by water, calling to see
my wife, with whom very merry for ten minutes, and so to Erith, where
my Lord Bruncker and I kept the office, and dispatched some business by
appointment on the Bezan. Among other things about the slopsellers, who
have trusted us so long, they are not able, nor can be expected to trust
us further, and I fear this winter the fleete will be undone by that
particular. Thence on board the East India ship, where my Lord Bruncker
had provided a great dinner, and thither comes by and by Sir John Minnes
and before him Sir W. Warren and anon a Perspective glasse maker, of
whom we, every one, bought a pocket glasse. But I am troubled with the
much talke and conceitedness of Mrs. Williams and her impudence, in
case she be not married to my Lord. They are getting themselves ready to
deliver the goods all out to the East India Company, who are to have
the goods in their possession and to advance two thirds of the moderate
value thereof and sell them as well as they can and the King to give
them 6 per cent. for the use of the money they shall so advance. By this
means the company will not suffer by the King’s goods bringing down the
price of their own. Thence in the evening back again with Sir W. Warren
and Captain Taylor in my boat, and the latter went with me to the
office, and there he and I reckoned; and I perceive I shall get L100
profit by my services of late to him, which is a very good thing. Thence
to my lodging, where I find my Lord Rutherford, of which I was glad.
We supped together and sat up late, he being a mighty wanton man with
a daughter in law of my landlady’s, a pretty conceited woman big with
child, and he would be handling her breasts, which she coyly refused.
But they gone, my Lord and I to business, and he would have me forbear
paying Alderman Backewell the money ordered him, which I, in hopes to
advantage myself, shall forbear, but do not think that my Lord will do
any thing gratefully more to me than he hath done, not that I shall get
any thing as I pretended by helping him to interest for his last L7700,
which I could do, and do him a courtesy too. Discourse being done, he to
bed in my chamber and I to another in the house.