October 1st (Lord’s day). Called up about 4 of the clock and so dressed
myself and so on board the Bezan, and there finding all my company
asleep I would not wake them, but it beginning to be break of day I
did stay upon the decke walking, and then into the Maister’s cabbin
and there laid and slept a little, and so at last was waked by Captain
Cocke’s calling of me, and so I turned out, and then to chat and talk
and laugh, and mighty merry. We spent most of the morning talking and
reading of “The Siege of Rhodes,” which is certainly (the more I read it
the more I think so) the best poem that ever was wrote. We breakfasted
betimes and come to the fleete about two of the clock in the afternoon,
having a fine day and a fine winde. My Lord received us mighty kindly,
and after discourse with us in general left us to our business, and he
to his officers, having called a council of wary, we in the meantime
settling of papers with Mr. Pierce and everybody else, and by and by
with Captain Cuttance. Anon called down to my Lord, and there with him
till supper talking and discourse; among other things, to my great joy,
he did assure me that he had wrote to the King and Duke about these
prize-goods, and told me that they did approve of what he had done, and
that he would owne what he had done, and would have me to tell all the
world so, and did, under his hand, give Cocke and me his certificate of
our bargains, and giving us full power of disposal of what we have so
bought. This do ease my mind of all my fear, and makes my heart lighter
by L100 than it was before. He did discourse to us of the Dutch fleete
being abroad, eighty-five of them still, and are now at the Texell, he
believes, in expectation of our Eastland ships coming home with masts
and hempe, and our loaden Hambrough ships going to Hambrough. He
discoursed against them that would have us yield to no conditions but
conquest over the Dutch, and seems to believe that the Dutch will call
for the protection of the King of France and come under his power, which
were to be wished they might be brought to do under ours by fair means,
and to that end would have all Dutch men and familys, that would come
hither and settled, to be declared denizens; and my Lord did whisper
to me alone that things here must break in pieces, nobody minding any
thing, but every man his owne business of profit or pleasure, and the
King some little designs of his owne, and that certainly the kingdom
could not stand in this condition long, which I fear and believe is very
true. So to supper and there my Lord the kindest man to me, before all
the table talking of me to my advantage and with tenderness too that it
overjoyed me. So after supper Captain Cocke and I and Temple on board
the Bezan, and there to cards for a while and then to read again in
“Rhodes” and so to sleep. But, Lord! the mirth which it caused me to be
waked in the night by their snoaring round about me; I did laugh till I
was ready to burst, and waked one of the two companions of Temple, who
could not a good while tell where he was that he heard one laugh so,
till he recollected himself, and I told him what it was at, and so to
sleep again, they still snoaring.