11th. Up, and so in my chamber staid all the morning doing something
toward my Tangier accounts, for the stating of them, and also comes up
my landlady, Mrs. Clerke, to make an agreement for the time to come; and
I, for the having room enough, and to keepe out strangers, and to have
a place to retreat to for my wife, if the sicknesse should come
to Woolwich, am contented to pay dear; so for three rooms and a
dining-room, and for linen and bread and beer and butter, at nights and
mornings, I am to give her L5 10s. per month, and I wrote and we signed
to an agreement. By and by comes Cocke to tell me that Fisher and his
fellow were last night mightily satisfied and promised all friendship,
but this morning he finds them to have new tricks and shall be troubled
with them. So he being to go down to Erith with them this afternoon
about giving security, I advised him to let them go by land, and so he
and I (having eat something at his house) by water to Erith, but
they got thither before us, and there we met Mr. Seymour, one of the
Commissioners for Prizes, and a Parliament-man, and he was mighty high,
and had now seized our goods on their behalf; and he mighty imperiously
would have all forfeited, and I know not what. I thought I was in the
right in a thing I said and spoke somewhat earnestly, so we took up one
another very smartly, for which I was sorry afterwards, shewing thereby
myself too much concerned, but nothing passed that I valued at all.
But I could not but think [it odd] that a Parliament-man, in a serious
discourse before such persons as we and my Lord Bruncker, and Sir John
Minnes, should quote Hudibras, as being the book I doubt he hath read
most. They I doubt will stand hard for high security, and Cocke would
have had me bound with him for his appearing, but I did stagger at it,
besides Seymour do stop the doing it at all till he has been with the
Duke of Albemarle. So there will be another demurre. It growing late,
and I having something to do at home, took my leave alone, leaving Cocke
there for all night, and so against tide and in the darke and very cold
weather to Woolwich, where we had appointed to keepe the night merrily;
and so, by Captain Cocke’s coach, had brought a very pretty child, a
daughter of one Mrs. Tooker’s, next door to my lodging, and so she,
and a daughter and kinsman of Mrs. Pett’s made up a fine company at my
lodgings at Woolwich, where my wife and Mercer, and Mrs. Barbara danced,
and mighty merry we were, but especially at Mercer’s dancing a jigg,
which she does the best I ever did see, having the most natural way of
it, and keeps time the most perfectly I ever did see. This night is kept
in lieu of yesterday, for my wedding day of ten years; for which God be
praised! being now in an extreme good condition of health and estate and
honour, and a way of getting more money, though at this houre under some
discomposure, rather than damage, about some prize goods that I have
bought off the fleete, in partnership with Captain Cocke; and for the
discourse about the world concerning my Lord Sandwich, that he hath done
a thing so bad; and indeed it must needs have been a very rash act; and
the rather because of a Parliament now newly met to give money, and will
have some account of what hath already been spent, besides the precedent
for a General to take what prizes he pleases, and the giving a pretence
to take away much more than he intended, and all will lie upon him; and
not giving to all the Commanders, as well as the Flaggs, he displeases
all them, and offends even some of them, thinking others to be better
served than themselves; and lastly, puts himself out of a power of
begging anything again a great while of the King. Having danced with my
people as long as I saw fit to sit up, I to bed and left them to do what
they would. I forgot that we had W. Hewer there, and Tom, and Golding,
my barber at Greenwich, for our fiddler, to whom I did give 10s.