3rd. It being Lord’s day, up and dressed and to church, thinking to have
sat with Sir James Bunce to hear his daughter and her husband sing, that
are so much commended, but was prevented by being invited into Coll.
Cleggatt’s pew. However, there I sat, near Mr. Laneare, with whom I
spoke, and in sight, by chance, and very near my fat brown beauty of our
Parish, the rich merchant’s lady, a very noble woman, and Madame Pierce.
A good sermon of Mr. Plume’s, and so to Captain Cocke’s, and there dined
with him, and Colonell Wyndham, a worthy gentleman, whose wife was nurse
to the present King, and one that while she lived governed him and every
thing else, as Cocke says, as a minister of state; the old King putting
mighty weight and trust upon her. They talked much of matters of State
and persons, and particularly how my Lord Barkeley hath all along been
a fortunate, though a passionate and but weak man as to policy; but as a
kinsman brought in and promoted by my Lord of St. Alban’s, and one that
is the greatest vapourer in the world, this Colonell Wyndham says; and
one to whom only, with Jacke Asheburnel and Colonel Legg, the King’s
removal to the Isle of Wight from Hampton Court was communicated;
and (though betrayed by their knavery, or at best by their ignorance,
insomuch that they have all solemnly charged one another with their
failures therein, and have been at daggers-drawing publickly about it),
yet now none greater friends in the world. We dined, and in comes Mrs.
Owen, a kinswoman of my Lord Bruncker’s, about getting a man discharged,
which I did for her, and by and by Mrs. Pierce to speake with me (and
Mary my wife’s late maid, now gone to her) about her husband’s business
of money, and she tells us how she prevented Captain Fisher the other
day in his purchase of all her husband’s fine goods, as pearls and
silks, that he had seized in an Apothecary’s house, a friend of theirs,
but she got in and broke them open and removed all before Captain Fisher
came the next day to fetch them away, at which he is starke mad. She
went home, and I to my lodgings. At night by agreement I fetched her
again with Cocke’s coach, and he come and we sat and talked together,
thinking to have had Mrs. Coleman and my songsters, her husband and
Laneare, but they failed me. So we to supper, and as merry as was
sufficient, and my pretty little Miss with me; and so after supper
walked [with] Pierce home, and so back and to bed. But, Lord! I stand
admiring of the wittinesse of her little boy, which is one of the
wittiest boys, but most confident that ever I did see of a child of 9
years old or under in all my life, or indeed one twice his age almost,
but all for roguish wit. So to bed.