13th. Up betimes and finished my journall for five days back, and then
after being ready to my Lord Bruncker by appointment, there to order the
disposing of some money that we have come into the office, and here to
my great content I did get a bill of imprest to Captain Cocke to pay
myself in part of what is coming to me from him for my Lord Sandwich’s
satisfaction and my owne, and also another payment or two wherein I am
concerned, and having done that did go to Mr. Pierce’s, where he and
his wife made me drink some tea, and so he and I by water together
to London. Here at a taverne in Cornhill he and I did agree upon my
delivering up to him a bill of Captain Cocke’s, put into my hand for
Pierce’s use upon evening of reckonings about the prize goods, and so
away to the ‘Change, and there hear the ill news, to my great and
all our great trouble, that the plague is encreased again this week,
notwithstanding there hath been a day or two great frosts; but we hope
it is only the effects of the late close warm weather, and if the frosts
continue the next week, may fall again; but the town do thicken so much
with people, that it is much if the plague do not grow again upon us.
Off the ‘Change invited by Sheriff Hooker, who keeps the poorest, mean,
dirty table in a dirty house that ever I did see any Sheriff of London;
and a plain, ordinary, silly man I think he is, but rich; only his son,
Mr. Lethulier, I like, for a pretty, civil, understanding merchant; and
the more by much, because he happens to be husband to our noble, fat,
brave lady in our parish, that I and my wife admire so. Thence away to
the Pope’s Head Taverne, and there met first with Captain Cocke, and
dispatched my business with him to my content, he being ready to sign
his bill of imprest of L2,000, and gives it me in part of his payment
to me, which glads my heart. He being gone, comes Sir W. Warren, who
advised with me about several things about getting money, and L100 I
shall presently have of him. We advised about a business of insurance,
wherein something may be saved to him and got to me, and to that end he
and I did take a coach at night and to the Cockepitt, there to get the
Duke of Albemarle’s advice for our insuring some of our Sounde goods
coming home under Harman’s convoy, but he proved shy of doing it without
knowledge of the Duke of Yorke, so we back again and calling at my house
to see my wife, who is well; though my great trouble is that our poor
little parish is the greatest number this weeke in all the city within
the walls, having six, from one the last weeke; and so by water to
Greenwich leaving Sir W. Warren at home, and I straight to my Lord
Bruncker, it being late, and concluded upon insuring something and to
send to that purpose to Sir W. Warren to come to us to-morrow morning.
So I home and, my mind in great rest, to bed.