19th (Lord’s day). Mr. Povy sent his coach for me betimes, and I to
him, and there to our great trouble do find that my Lord FitzHarding do
appear for Mr. Brunkard

     [Henry Brouncker, younger brother of William, Viscount Brouncker,
     President of the Royal Society.  He was Groom of the Bedchamber to
     the Duke of York, and succeeded to the office of Cofferer on the
     death of William Ashburnham in 1671.  His character was bad, and his
     conduct in the sea-fight of 1665 was impugned.  He was expelled from
     the House of Commons, but succeeded to his brother’s title in 1684.
     He died in January, 1687.]

to be Paymaster upon Povy’s going out, by a former promise of the
Duke’s, and offering to give as much as any for it. This put us all into
a great dumpe, and so we went to Creed’s new lodging in the Mewes, and
there we found Creed with his parrot upon his shoulder, which struck Mr.
Povy coming by just by the eye, very deep, which, had it hit his eye,
had put it out. This a while troubled us, but not proving very bad, we
to our business consulting what to do; at last resolved, and I to Mr.
Coventry, and there had his most friendly and ingenuous advice, advising
me not to decline the thing, it being that that will bring me to be
known to great persons, while now I am buried among three or four of us,
says he, in the Navy; but do not make a declared opposition to my Lord
FitzHarding. Thence I to Creed, and walked talking in the Park an hour
with him, and then to my Lord Sandwich’s to dinner, and after dinner to
Mr. Povy’s, who hath been with the Duke of Yorke, and, by the mediation
of Mr. Coventry, the Duke told him that the business shall go on, and
he will take off Brunkerd, and my Lord FitzHarding is quiett too. But to
see the mischief, I hear that Sir G. Carteret did not seem pleased, but
said nothing when he heard me proposed to come in Povy’s room, which may
learn me to distinguish between that man that is a man’s true and false
friend. Being very glad of this news Mr. Povy and I in his coach to Hyde
Parke, being the first day of the tour there. Where many brave ladies;
among others, Castlemayne lay impudently upon her back in her coach
asleep, with her mouth open. There was also my Lady Kerneguy,

     [Daughter of William, Duke of Hamilton, wife of Lord Carnegy, who
     became Earl of Southesk on his father’s death.  She is frequently
     mentioned in the “Memoires de Grammont,” and in the letters of the
     second Earl of Chesterfield.--B.]

once my Lady Anne Hambleton, that is said to have given the Duke a clap
upon his first coming over. Here I saw Sir J. Lawson’s daughter and
husband, a fine couple, and also Mr. Southwell and his new lady, very
pretty. Thence back, putting in at Dr. Whore’s, where I saw his lady, a
very fine woman. So home, and thither by my desire comes by and by Creed
and lay with me, very merry and full of discourse, what to do to-morrow,
and the conveniences that will attend my having of this place, and I do
think they may be very great.