18th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to the Duke of Albemarle, where we did
much business, and I with good content to myself; among other things
we did examine Nixon and Stanesby, about their late running from two
Dutchmen;

     [Captain Edward Nixon, of the “Elizabeth,” and Captain John
     Stanesby, of the “Eagle.”  John Lanyon wrote to the Navy
     Commissioners from Plymouth, May 16th: “Understands from the seamen
     that the conduct of Captains Nixon and Stanesby in their late
     engagement with two Dutch capers was very foul; the night they left
     the Dutch, no lights were put out as formerly, and though in sight
     of them in the morning, they still kept on their way; the Eagle lay
     by some time, and both the enemy’s ships plied on her, but finding
     the Elizabeth nearly out of sight she also made sail; it is true the
     wind and sea were high, but there were no sufficient reasons for
     such endeavours to get from them.” (“Calendar of State Papers,”
      Domestic, 1664-65, p. 367).  Both captains were tried; Nixon was
     condemned to be shot but Stanesby was cleared, and Charnock asserts
     that he was commander the “Happy Return” in 1672.]

for which they are committed to a vessel to carry them to the fleete
to be tried. A most fowle unhandsome thing as ever was heard, for plain
cowardice on Nixon’s part. Thence with the Duke of Albemarle in his
coach to my Lord Treasurer, and there was before the King (who ever now
calls me by my name) and Lord Chancellor, and many other great Lords,
discoursing about insuring of some of the King’s goods, wherein the King
accepted of my motion that we should; and so away, well pleased. To the
office, and dined, and then to the office again, and abroad to speak
with Sir G. Carteret; but, Lord! to see how fraile a man I am, subject
to my vanities, that can hardly forbear, though pressed with never so
much business, my pursuing of pleasure, but home I got, and there very
busy very late. Among other things consulting with Mr. Andrews about our
Tangier business, wherein we are like to meet with some trouble, and
my Lord Bellasses’s endeavour to supplant us, which vexes my mind; but,
however, our undertaking is so honourable that we shall stand a tug for
it I think. So home to supper and to bed.