11th. Up and walked to the office, there to do some business till ten of
the clock, and then by agreement my Lord, Sir J. Minnes, Sir W. Doyly,
and I took boat and over to the ferry, where Sir W. Batten’s coach
was ready for us, and to Walthamstow drove merrily, excellent merry
discourse in the way, and most upon our last night’s revells; there come
we were very merry, and a good plain venison dinner. After dinner to
billiards, where I won an angel,

     [A gold coin, so called because it bore the image of an angel,
     varying in value from six shillings and eightpence to ten
     shillings.]

and among other sports we were merry with my pretending to have a
warrant to Sir W. Hickes (who was there, and was out of humour with Sir
W. Doyly’s having lately got a warrant for a leash of buckes, of which
we were now eating one) which vexed him, and at last would compound with
me to give my Lord Bruncker half a buck now, and me a Doe for it a while
hence when the season comes in, which we agreed to and had held, but
that we fear Sir W. Doyly did betray our design, which spoiled all;
however, my Lady Batten invited herself to dine with him this week, and
she invited us all to dine with her there, which we agreed to, only to
vex him, he being the most niggardly fellow, it seems, in the world.
Full of good victuals and mirth we set homeward in the evening, and
very merry all the way. So to Greenwich, where when come I find my
Lord Rutherford and Creed come from Court, and among other things have
brought me several orders for money to pay for Tangier; and, among
the rest L7000 and more, to this Lord, which is an excellent thing to
consider, that, though they can do nothing else, they can give away
the King’s money upon their progresse. I did give him the best answer I
could to pay him with tallys, and that is all they could get from me.
I was not in humour to spend much time with them, but walked a little
before Sir J. Minnes’s door and then took leave, and I by water to
Woolwich, where with my wife to a game at tables,

     [The old name for backgammon, used by Shakespeare and others.  The
     following lines are from an epitaph entirely made up of puns on
     backgammon

              “Man’s life’s a game at tables, and he may
               Mend his bad fortune by his wiser play.”

                              Wit’s Recre., i. 250, reprint, 1817.]

and to bed.