9th. Up and walked to White Hall, it being still a brave frost, and I
in perfect good health, blessed be God! In my way saw a woman that broke
her thigh, in her heels slipping up upon the frosty streete. To the
Duke, and there did our usual worke. Here I saw the Royal Society bring
their new book, wherein is nobly writ their charter’ and laws, and comes
to be signed by the Duke as a Fellow; and all the Fellows’ hands are to
be entered there, and lie as a monument; and the King hath put his with
the word Founder. Thence I to Westminster, to my barber’s, and found
occasion to see Jane, but in presence of her mistress, and so could
not speak to her of her failing me yesterday, and then to the Swan to
Herbert’s girl, and lost time a little with her, and so took coach, and
to my Lord Crew’s and dined with him, who receives me with the greatest
respect that could be, telling me that he do much doubt of the successe
of this warr with Holland, we going about it, he doubts, by the
instigation of persons that do not enough apprehend the consequences of
the danger of it, and therein I do think with him. Holmes was this day
sent to the Tower,--[For taking New York from the Dutch]--but I perceive
it is made matter of jest only; but if the Dutch should be our masters,
it may come to be of earnest to him, to be given over to them for a
sacrifice, as Sir W. Rawly [Raleigh] was. Thence to White Hall to a
Tangier Committee, where I was accosted and most highly complimented by
my Lord Bellasses,

     [John Belasyse, second son of Thomas, first Viscount Fauconberg,
     created Baron Belasyse of Worlaby, January 27th, 1644, Lord
     Lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire, and Governor of Hull.
     He was appointed Governor of Tangier, and Captain of the Band of
     Gentlemen Pensioners.  He was a Roman Catholic, and therefore was
     deprived of all his appointments in 1672 by the provisions of the
     Test Act, but in 1684 James II. made him First Commissioner of the
     Treasury.  He died 1689.]

our new governor, beyond my expectation, or measure I could imagine he
would have given any man, as if I were the only person of business that
he intended to rely on, and desires my correspondence with him. This I
was not only surprized at, but am well pleased with, and may make good
use of it. Our patent is renewed, and he and my Lord Barkeley, and Sir
Thomas Ingram put in as commissioners. Here some business happened which
may bring me some profit. Thence took coach and calling my wife at her
tailor’s (she being come this afternoon to bring her mother some apples,
neat’s tongues, and wine); I home, and there at my office late with Sir
W. Warren, and had a great deal of good discourse and counsel from him,
which I hope I shall take, being all for my good in my deportment in my
office, yet with all honesty. He gone I home to supper and to bed.