26th (Lord’s day). Up, though very late abed, yet before day to dress
myself to go toward Erith, which I would do by land, it being a horrible
cold frost to go by water: so borrowed two horses of Mr. Howell and his
friend, and with much ado set out, after my horses being frosted

     [Frosting means, having the horses’ shoes turned up by the smith.]

(which I know not what it means to this day), and my boy having lost one
of my spurs and stockings, carrying them to the smith’s; but I borrowed
a stocking, and so got up, and Mr. Tooker with me, and rode to Erith,
and there on board my Lord Bruncker, met Sir W. Warren upon his
business, among others, and did a great deale, Sir J. Minnes, as God
would have it, not being there to hinder us with his impertinences.
Business done, we to dinner very merry, there being there Sir Edmund
Pooly, a very worthy gentleman. They are now come to the copper boxes
in the prizes, and hope to have ended all this weeke. After dinner took
leave, and on shore to Madam Williams, to give her an account of my
Lord’s letter to me about Howe, who he has clapped by the heels on
suspicion of having the jewells, and she did give me my Lord Bruncker’s
examination of the fellow, that declares his having them; and so away,
Sir W. Warren riding with me, and the way being very bad, that is,
hard and slippery by reason of the frost, so we could not come to past
Woolwich till night. However, having a great mind to have gone to the
Duke of Albemarle, I endeavoured to have gone farther, but the night
come on and no going, so I ‘light and sent my horse by Tooker, and
returned on foot to my wife at Woolwich, where I found, as I had
directed, a good dinner to be made against to-morrow, and invited guests
in the yarde, meaning to be merry, in order to her taking leave, for
she intends to come in a day or two to me for altogether. But here, they
tell me, one of the houses behind them is infected, and I was fain to
stand there a great while, to have their back-door opened, but they
could not, having locked them fast, against any passing through, so was
forced to pass by them again, close to their sicke beds, which they were
removing out of the house, which troubled me; so I made them uninvite
their guests, and to resolve of coming all away to me to-morrow, and I
walked with a lanthorne, weary as I was, to Greenwich; but it was a fine
walke, it being a hard frost, and so to Captain Cocke’s, but he I found
had sent for me to come to him to Mrs. Penington’s, and there I went,
and we were very merry, and supped, and Cocke being sleepy he went away
betimes. I stayed alone talking and playing with her till past midnight,
she suffering me whatever ‘ego voulais avec ses mamilles.... Much
pleased with her company we parted, and I home to bed at past one, all
people being in bed thinking I would have staid out of town all night.