8th. Waked, and fell in talk with my wife about the letter, and she
satisfied me that she did not know from whence it come, but believed
it might be from her cozen Franke Moore lately come out of France. The
truth is the thing I think cannot have much in it, and being unwilling
(being in other things so much at ease) to vex myself in a strange place
at a melancholy time, passed all by and were presently friends. Up,
and several with me about business. Anon comes my Lord Bruncker, as
I expected, and we to the enquiring into the business of the late
desertion of the Shipwrights from worke, who had left us for three days
together for want of money, and upon this all the morning, and brought
it to a pretty good issue, that they, we believe, will come to-morrow to
work. To dinner, having but a mean one, yet sufficient for him, and he
well enough pleased, besides that I do not desire to vye entertainments
with him or any else. Here was Captain Cocke also, and Mr. Wayth. We
staid together talking upon one business or other all the afternoon. In
the evening my Lord Bruncker hearing that Mr. Ackeworth’s clerke, the
Dutchman who writes and draws so well, was transcribing a book of Rates
and our ships for Captain Millet a gallant of his mistress’s, we sent
for him for it. He would not deliver it, but said it was his mistress’s
and had delivered it to her. At last we were forced to send to her for
it; she would come herself, and indeed the book was a very neat one and
worth keeping as a rarity, but we did think fit, and though much against
my will, to cancell all that he had finished of it, and did give her
the rest, which vexed her, and she bore it discreetly enough, but with
a cruel deal of malicious rancour in her looks. I must confess I would
have persuaded her to have let us have it to the office, and it may be
the board would not have censured too hardly of it, but my intent was
to have had it as a Record for the office, but she foresaw what would be
the end of it and so desired it might rather be cancelled, which was a
plaguy deal of spite. My Lord Bruncker being gone and company, and she
also, afterwards I took my wife and people and walked into the fields
about a while till night, and then home, and so to sing a little and
then to bed. I was in great trouble all this day for my boy Tom who went
to Greenwich yesterday by my order and come not home till to-night for
fear of the plague, but he did come home to-night, saying he staid last
night by Mr. Hater’s advice hoping to have me called as I come home with
my boat to come along with me.