5 o’clock, it blowing very hard, and now and then raining, and wind and
tide being against us, Andrews and I took leave and walked to Greenwich.
My wife before I come out telling me the ill news that she hears that
her father is very ill, and then I told her I feared of the plague, for
that the house is shut up. And so she much troubled she did desire me
to send them something; and I said I would, and will do so. But before
I come out there happened newes to come to the by an expresse from Mr.
Coventry, telling me the most happy news of my Lord Sandwich’s meeting
with part of the Dutch; his taking two of their East India ships, and
six or seven others, and very good prizes and that he is in search of
the rest of the fleet, which he hopes to find upon the Wellbancke,
with the loss only of the Hector, poor Captain Cuttle. This newes do
so overjoy me that I know not what to say enough to express it, but
the better to do it I did walk to Greenwich, and there sending away Mr.
Andrews, I to Captain Cocke’s, where I find my Lord Bruncker and his
mistress, and Sir J. Minnes. Where we supped (there was also Sir W.
Doyly and Mr. Evelyn); but the receipt of this newes did put us all
into such an extacy of joy, that it inspired into Sir J. Minnes and Mr.
Evelyn such a spirit of mirth, that in all my life I never met with so
merry a two hours as our company this night was. Among other humours,
Mr. Evelyn’s repeating of some verses made up of nothing but the various
acceptations of may and can, and doing it so aptly upon occasion of
something of that nature, and so fast, did make us all die almost with
laughing, and did so stop the mouth of Sir J. Minnes in the middle of
all his mirth (and in a thing agreeing with his own manner of genius),
that I never saw any man so out-done in all my life; and Sir J. Minnes’s
mirth too to see himself out-done, was the crown of all our mirth.
In this humour we sat till about ten at night, and so my Lord and his
mistress home, and we to bed, it being one of the times of my life
wherein I was the fullest of true sense of joy.