5th. Up, and advised about sending of my wife’s bedding and things to
Woolwich, in order to her removal thither. So to the office, where all
the morning till noon, and so to the ‘Change, and thence home to dinner.
In the afternoon I abroad to St. James’s, and there with Mr. Coventry a
good while, and understand how matters are ordered in the fleete: that
is, my Lord Sandwich goes Admiral; under him Sir G. Ascue, and Sir T.
Teddiman; Vice-Admiral, Sir W. Pen; and under him Sir W. Barkeley, and
Sir Jos. Jordan: Reere-Admiral, Sir Thomas Allen; and under him Sir
Christopher Mings,

     [The son of a shoemaker, bred to the sea-service; he rose to the
     rank of an admiral, and was killed in the fight with the Dutch,
     June, 1666.--B.  See post, June 10th, 1666.]

and Captain Harman. We talked in general of business of the Navy, among
others how he had lately spoken to Sir G. Carteret, and professed great
resolution of friendship with him and reconciliation, and resolves to
make it good as well as he can, though it troubles him, he tells me,
that something will come before him wherein he must give him offence,
but I do find upon the whole that Mr. Coventry do not listen to these
complaints of money with the readiness and resolvedness to remedy that
he used to do, and I think if he begins to draw in it is high time for
me to do so too. From thence walked round to White Hall, the Parke being
quite locked up; and I observed a house shut up this day in the Pell
Mell, where heretofore in Cromwell’s time we young men used to keep our
weekly clubs. And so to White Hall to Sir G. Carteret, who is come this
day from Chatham, and mighty glad he is to see me, and begun to talk of
our great business of the match, which goes on as fast as possible, but
for convenience we took water and over to his coach to Lambeth, by which
we went to Deptford, all the way talking, first, how matters are quite
concluded with all possible content between my Lord and him and signed
and sealed, so that my Lady Sandwich is to come thither to-morrow or
next day, and the young lady is sent for, and all likely to be ended
between them in a very little while, with mighty joy on both sides, and
the King, Duke, Lord Chancellor, and all mightily pleased. Thence to
newes, wherein I find that Sir G. Carteret do now take all my Lord
Sandwich’s business to heart, and makes it the same with his owne. He
tells me how at Chatham it was proposed to my Lord Sandwich to be joined
with the Prince in the command of the fleete, which he was most willing
to; but when it come to the Prince, he was quite against it; saying,
there could be no government, but that it would be better to have two
fleetes, and neither under the command of the other, which he would not
agree to. So the King was not pleased; but, without any unkindnesse,
did order the fleete to be ordered as above, as to the Admirals and
commands: so the Prince is come up; and Sir G. Carteret, I remember, had
this word thence, that, says he, by this means, though the King told him
that it would be but for this expedition, yet I believe we shall keepe
him out for altogether. He tells me how my Lord was much troubled at Sir
W. Pen’s being ordered forth (as it seems he is, to go to Solebay, and
with the best fleete he can, to go forth), and no notice taken of my
Lord Sandwich going after him, and having the command over him. But
after some discourse Mr. Coventry did satisfy, as he says, my Lord, so
as they parted friends both in that point and upon the other wherein I
know my Lord was troubled, and which Mr. Coventry did speak to him of
first thinking that my Lord might justly take offence at, his not being
mentioned in the relation of the fight in the news book, and did clear
all to my Lord how little he was concerned in it, and therewith my Lord
also satisfied, which I am mightily glad of, because I should take it
a very great misfortune to me to have them two to differ above all the
persons in the world. Being come to Deptford, my Lady not being within,
we parted, and I by water to Woolwich, where I found my wife come, and
her two mayds, and very prettily accommodated they will be; and I left
them going to supper, grieved in my heart to part with my wife, being
worse by much without her, though some trouble there is in having the
care of a family at home in this plague time, and so took leave, and I
in one boat and W. Hewer in another home very late, first against tide,
we having walked in the dark to Greenwich. Late home and to bed, very
lonely.