1673, while]

put in) hath delivered up to the Duke his commission, which the Duke
took and tore. He, it seems, had bid the Prince, who first told him of
Holmes’s intention, that he should dissuade him from it; for that he
was resolved to take it if he offered it. Yet Holmes would do it, like
a rash, proud coxcombe. But he is rich, and hath, it seems, sought an
occasion of leaving the service. Several of our captains have done ill.
The great ships are the ships do the business, they quite deadening the
enemy. They run away upon sight of “The Prince.”

     [“The Prince” was Lord Sandwich’s ship; the captain was Roger
     Cuttance.  It was put up at Chatham for repair at this date.]

It is strange to see how people do already slight Sir William Barkeley,

     [Sir William Berkeley, see note, vol.  iii., p.  334.  His behaviour
     after the death of his brother, Lord Falmouth, is severely commented
     on in “Poems on State Affairs,” vol. i., p. 29

              “Berkeley had heard it soon, and thought not good
               To venture more of royal Harding’s blood;
               To be immortal he was not of age,
               And did e’en now the Indian Prize presage;
               And judged it safe and decent, cost what cost,
               To lose the day, since his dear brother’s lost.
               With his whole squadron straight away he bore,
               And, like good boy, promised to fight no more.”--B.]

my Lord FitzHarding’s brother, who, three months since, was the delight
of the Court. Captain Smith of “The Mary” the Duke talks mightily of;
and some great thing will be done for him. Strange to hear how the Dutch
do relate, as the Duke says, that they are the conquerors; and bonefires
are made in Dunkirke in their behalf; though a clearer victory can never
be expected. Mr. Coventry thinks they cannot have lost less than 6000
men, and we not dead above 200, and wounded about 400; in all about 600.
Thence home and to my office till past twelve, and then home to supper
and to bed, my wife and mother not being yet come home from W. Hewer’s
chamber, who treats my mother tonight. Captain Grovel the Duke told us
this day, hath done the basest thing at Lowestoffe, in hearing of the
guns, and could not (as others) be got out, but staid there; for which
he will be tried; and is reckoned a prating coxcombe, and of no courage.