23rd. Up, and to my Lord Sandwich, who did advise alone with me how far
he might trust Captain Cocke in the business of the prize-goods, my Lord
telling me that he hath taken into his hands 2 or L3000 value of them:
it being a good way, he says, to get money, and afterwards to get the
King’s allowance thereof, it being easier, he observes, to keepe money
when got of the King than to get it when it is too late. I advised him
not to trust Cocke too far, and did therefore offer him ready money for
a L1000 or two, which he listens to and do agree to, which is great joy
to me, hoping thereby to get something! Thence by coach to Lambeth, his
Lordship, and all our office, and Mr. Evelyn, to the Duke of Albemarle,
where, after the compliment with my Lord very kind, we sat down to
consult of the disposing and supporting of the fleete with victuals and
money, and for the sicke men and prisoners; and I did propose the taking
out some goods out of the prizes, to the value of L10,000, which was
accorded to, and an order, drawn up and signed by the Duke and my Lord,
done in the best manner I can, and referred to my Lord Bruncker and Sir
J. Minnes, but what inconveniences may arise from it I do not yet see,
but fear there may be many. Here we dined, and I did hear my Lord Craven
whisper, as he is mightily possessed with a good opinion of me, much to
my advantage, which my good Lord did second, and anon my Lord Craven did
speak publiquely of me to the Duke, in the hearing of all the rest; and
the Duke did say something of the like advantage to me; I believe, not
much to the satisfaction of my brethren; but I was mightily joyed at it.
Thence took leave, leaving my Lord Sandwich to go visit the Bishop of
Canterbury, and I and Sir W. Batten down to the Tower, where he went
further by water, and I home, and among other things took out all my
gold to carry along with me to-night with Captain Cocke downe to the
fleete, being L180 and more, hoping to lay out that and a great deal
more to good advantage. Thence down to Greenwich to the office, and
there wrote several letters, and so to my Lord Sandwich, and mighty
merry and he mighty kind to me in the face of all, saying much in my
favour, and after supper I took leave and with Captain Cocke set out
in the yacht about ten o’clock at night, and after some discourse, and
drinking a little, my mind full of what we are going about and jealous
of Cocke’s outdoing me. So to sleep upon beds brought by Cocke on board
mighty handsome, and never slept better than upon this bed upon the
floor in the Cabbin.