19th. Up, and to White Hall, where the Committee for Tangier met, and
there, though the case as to the merit of it was most plain and most of
the company favourable to our business, yet it was with much ado that
I got the business not carried fully against us, but put off to another
day, my Lord Arlington being the great man in it, and I was sorry to be
found arguing so greatly against him. The business I believe will in the
end be carried against us, and the whole business fall; I must therefore
endeavour the most I can to get money another way. It vexed me to see
Creed so hot against it, but I cannot much blame him, having never
declared to him my being concerned in it. But that that troubles me most
is my Lord Arlington calls to me privately and asks me whether I had
ever said to any body that I desired to leave this employment, having
not time to look after it. I told him, No, for that the thing being
settled it will not require much time to look after it. He told me
then he would do me right to the King, for he had been told so, which I
desired him to do, and by and by he called me to him again and asked
me whether I had no friend about the Duke, asking me (I making a stand)
whether Mr. Coventry was not my friend. I told him I had received many
friendships from him. He then advised me to procure that the Duke would
in his next letter write to him to continue me in my place and remove
any obstruction; which I told him I would, and thanked him. So parted,
vexed at the first and amazed at this business of my Lord Arlington’s.
Thence to the Exchequer, and there got my tallys for L17,500, the first
payment I ever had out of the Exchequer, and at the Legg spent 14s.
upon my old acquaintance, some of them the clerks, and away home with my
tallys in a coach, fearful every step of having one of them fall out,
or snatched from me. Being come home, I much troubled out again by coach
(for company taking Sir W. Warren with me), intending to have spoke to
my Lord Arlington to have known the bottom of it, but missed him, and
afterwards discoursing the thing as a confidant to Sir W. Warren, he did
give me several good hints and principles not to do anything suddenly,
but consult my pillow upon that and every great thing of my life, before
I resolve anything in it. Away back home, and not being fit for business
I took my wife and Mercer down by water to Greenwich at 8 at night,
it being very fine and cool and moonshine afterward. Mighty pleasant
passage it was; there eat a cake or two, and so home by 10 or 11 at
night, and then to bed, my mind not settled what to think.