28th. Up before day, and Cocke and I took a hackney coach appointed with
four horses to take us up, and so carried us over London Bridge. But
there, thinking of some business, I did ‘light at the foot of the
bridge, and by helpe of a candle at a stall, where some payers were at
work, I wrote a letter to Mr. Hater, and never knew so great an instance
of the usefulness of carrying pen and ink and wax about one: so we, the
way being very bad, to Nonesuch, and thence to Sir Robert Longs house; a
fine place, and dinner time ere we got thither; but we had breakfasted a
little at Mr. Gawden’s, he being out of towne though, and there borrowed
Dr. Taylor’s sermons, and is a most excellent booke and worth my buying,
where had a very good dinner, and curiously dressed, and here a couple
of ladies, kinswomen of his, not handsome though, but rich, that knew me
by report of The. Turner, and mighty merry we were. After dinner to talk
of our business, the Act of Parliament, where in short I see Sir R. Long
mighty fierce in the great good qualities of it. But in that and many
other things he was stiff in, I think without much judgement, or
the judgement I expected from him, and already they have evaded the
necessity of bringing people into the Exchequer with their bills to be
paid there. Sir G. Carteret is titched--[fretful, tetchy]--at this, yet
resolves with me to make the best use we can of this Act for the King,
but all our care, we think, will not render it as it should be. He
did again here alone discourse with me about my Lord, and is himself
strongly for my Lord’s not going to sea, which I am glad to hear and did
confirm him in it. He tells me too that he talked last night with the
Duke of Albemarle about my Lord Sandwich, by the by making him sensible
that it is his interest to preserve his old friends, which he confessed
he had reason to do, for he knows that ill offices were doing of him,
and that he honoured my Lord Sandwich with all his heart. After this
discourse we parted, and all of us broke up and we parted. Captain Cocke
and I through Wandsworth. Drank at Sir Allen Broderick’s, a great friend
and comrade of Cocke’s, whom he values above the world for a witty
companion, and I believe he is so. So to Fox-Hall and there took boat,
and down to the Old Swan, and thence to Lumbard Streete, it being darke
night, and thence to the Tower. Took boat and down to Greenwich, Cocke
and I, he home and I to the office, where did a little business, and
then to my lodgings, where my wife is come, and I am well pleased with
it, only much trouble in those lodgings we have, the mistresse of the
house being so deadly dear in everything we have; so that we do resolve
to remove home soon as we know how the plague goes this weeke, which we
hope will be a good decrease. So to bed.