10th. Up, and with great pleasure looking over a nest of puppies of Mr.
Shelden’s, with which my wife is most extraordinary pleased, and one
of them is promised her. Anon I took my leave, and away by water to the
Duke of Albemarle’s, where he tells me that I must be at Hampton Court
anon. So I home to look over my Tangier papers, and having a coach of
Mr. Povy’s attending me, by appointment, in order to my coming to dine
at his country house at Brainford, where he and his family is, I went
and Mr. Tasbrough with me therein, it being a pretty chariot, but most
inconvenient as to the horses throwing dust and dirt into one’s eyes
and upon one’s clothes. There I staid a quarter of an houre, Creed being
there, and being able to do little business (but the less the better).
Creed rode before, and Mr. Povy and I after him in the chariot; and I
was set down by him at the Parke pale, where one of his saddle horses
was ready for me, he himself not daring to come into the house or be
seen, because that a servant of his, out of his horse, happened to be
sicke, but is not yet dead, but was never suffered to come into his
house after he was ill. But this opportunity was taken to injure
Povy, and most horribly he is abused by some persons hereupon, and his
fortune, I believe, quite broke; but that he hath a good heart to bear,
or a cunning one to conceal his evil. There I met with Sir W. Coventry,
and by and by was heard by my Lord Chancellor and Treasurer about our
Tangier money, and my Lord Treasurer had ordered me to forbear meddling
with the L15,000 he offered me the other day, but, upon opening the case
to them, they did offer it again, and so I think I shall have it, but
my Lord General must give his consent in it, this money having been
promised to him, and he very angry at the proposal. Here though I have
not been in many years, yet I lacke time to stay, besides that it is,
I perceive, an unpleasing thing to be at Court, everybody being fearful
one of another, and all so sad, enquiring after the plague, so that I
stole away by my horse to Kingston, and there with trouble was forced,
to press two sturdy rogues to carry me to London, and met at the
waterside with Mr. Charnocke, Sir Philip Warwicke’s clerke, who had been
in company and was quite foxed. I took him with me in my boat, and so
away to Richmond, and there, by night, walked with him to Moreclacke, a
very pretty walk, and there staid a good while, now and then talking and
sporting with Nan the servant, who says she is a seaman’s wife, and at
last bade good night.