22nd. Up, and to Mr. Povy’s about our business, and thence I to see Sir
Ph. Warwicke, but could not meet with him. So to Mr. Coventry, whose
profession of love and esteem for me to myself was so large and free
that I never could expect or wish for more, nor could have it from any
man in England, that I should value it more. Thence to Mr. Povy’s, and
with Creed to the ‘Change and to my house, but, it being washing day,
dined not at home, but took him (I being invited) to Mr. Hubland’s, the
merchant, where Sir William Petty, and abundance of most ingenious men,
owners and freighters of “The Experiment,” now going with her two bodies
to sea. Most excellent discourse. Among others, Sir William Petty did
tell me that in good earnest he hath in his will left such parts of his
estate to him that could invent such and such things. As among others,
that could discover truly the way of milk coming into the breasts of a
woman; and he that could invent proper characters to express to another
the mixture of relishes and tastes. And says, that to him that invents
gold, he gives nothing for the philosopher’s stone; for (says he) they
that find out that, will be able to pay themselves. But, says he,
by this means it is better than to give to a lecture; for here my
executors, that must part with this, will be sure to be well convinced
of the invention before they do part with their money. After dinner Mr.
Hill took me with Mrs. Hubland, who is a fine gentlewoman, into another
room, and there made her sing, which she do very well, to my great
content. Then to Gresham College, and there did see a kitling killed
almost quite, but that we could not quite kill her, with such a way; the
ayre out of a receiver, wherein she was put, and then the ayre being let
in upon her revives her immediately;

     [“Two experiments were made for the finding out a way to breathe
     under water, useful for divers.”  The first was on a bird and the
     second on “a kitling” (Birch’s “History,” vol. ii., p. 25).]

nay, and this ayre is to be made by putting together a liquor and some
body that ferments, the steam of that do do the work. Thence home,
and thence to White Hall, where the house full of the Duke’s going
to-morrow, and thence to St. James’s, wherein these things fell out: (1)
I saw the Duke, kissed his hand, and had his most kind expressions of
his value and opinion of me, which comforted me above all things in the
world, (2) the like from Mr. Coventry most heartily and affectionately.
(3) Saw, among other fine ladies, Mrs. Middleton,

     [Jane, daughter to Sir Robert Needham, is frequently mentioned in
     the “Grammont Memoirs,” and Evelyn calls her “that famous and indeed
     incomparable beauty” (“Diary,” August 2nd, 1683).  Her portrait is
     in the Royal Collection amongst the beauties of Charles II.’s Court.
     Sir Robert Needham was related to John Evelyn.]

a very great beauty I never knew or heard of before; (4) I saw Waller
the poet, whom I never saw before. So, very late, by coach home with W.
Pen, who was there. To supper and to bed, with my heart at rest, and
my head very busy thinking of my several matters now on foot, the new
comfort of my old navy business, and the new one of my employment on
Tangier.