3rd. Up, and to my great content visited betimes by Mr. Woolly, my uncle
Wight’s cozen, who comes to see what work I have for him about these
East India goods, and I do find that this fellow might have been of
great use, and hereafter may be of very great use to me, in this trade
of prize goods, and glad I am fully of his coming hither. While I
dressed myself, and afterwards in walking to Greenwich we did discourse
over all the business of the prize goods, and he puts me in hopes I may
get some money in what I have done, but not so much as I expected, but
that I may hereafter do more. We have laid a design of getting more, and
are to talk again of it a few days hence. To the office, where nobody to
meet me, Sir W. Batten being the only man and he gone this day to meet
to adjourne the Parliament to Oxford. Anon by appointment comes one
to tell me my Lord Rutherford is come; so I to the King’s Head to him,
where I find his lady, a fine young Scotch lady, pretty handsome and
plain. My wife also, and Mercer, by and by comes, Creed bringing
them; and so presently to dinner and very merry; and after to even our
accounts, and I to give him tallys, where he do allow me L100, of
which to my grief the rogue Creed has trepanned me out of L50. But I do
foresee a way how it may be I may get a greater sum of my Lord to his
content by getting him allowance of interest upon his tallys. That being
done, and some musique and other diversions, at last away goes my
Lord and Lady, and I sent my wife to visit Mrs. Pierce, and so I to my
office, where wrote important letters to the Court, and at night (Creed
having clownishly left my wife), I to Mrs. Pierces and brought her and
Mrs. Pierce to the King’s Head and there spent a piece upon a supper for
her and mighty merry and pretty discourse, she being as pretty as ever,
most of our mirth being upon “my Cozen” (meaning my Lord Bruncker’s ugly
mistress, whom he calls cozen), and to my trouble she tells me that the
fine Mrs. Middleton is noted for carrying about her body a continued
sour base smell, that is very offensive, especially if she be a little
hot. Here some bad musique to close the night and so away and all of us
saw Mrs. Belle Pierce (as pretty as ever she was almost) home, and so
walked to Will’s lodging where I used to lie, and there made shift for a
bed for Mercer, and mighty pleasantly to bed. This night I hear that
of our two watermen that use to carry our letters, and were well on
Saturday last, one is dead, and the other dying sick of the plague. The
plague, though decreasing elsewhere, yet being greater about the Tower
and thereabouts.