19th. About 4 or 5 of the clock we come to Greenwich, and, having first
set down my Lord Bruncker, Cocke and I went to his house, it being
light, and there to our great trouble, we being sleepy and cold, we met
with the ill newes that his boy Jacke was gone to bed sicke, which put
Captain Cocke and me also into much trouble, the boy, as they told us,
complaining of his head most, which is a bad sign it seems. So they
presently betook themselves to consult whither and how to remove him.
However I thought it not fit for me to discover too much fear to go
away, nor had I any place to go to. So to bed I went and slept till 10
of the clock and then comes Captain Cocke to wake me and tell me that
his boy was well again. With great joy I heard the newes and he told
it, so I up and to the office where we did a little, and but a little
business. At noon by invitation to my Lord Bruncker’s where we staid
till four of the clock for my Lady Batten and she not then coming we to
dinner and pretty merry but disordered by her making us stay so long.
After dinner I to the office, and there wrote letters and did business
till night and then to Sir J. Minnes’s, where I find my Lady Batten
come, and she and my Lord Bruncker and his mistresse, and the whole
house-full there at cards. But by and by my Lord Bruncker goes away and
others of the company, and when I expected Sir J. Minnes and his sister
should have staid to have made Sir W. Batten and Lady sup, I find they
go up in snuffe to bed without taking any manner of leave of them, but
left them with Mr. Boreman. The reason of this I could not presently
learn, but anon I hear it is that Sir J. Minnes did expect and
intend them a supper, but they without respect to him did first apply
themselves to Boreman, which makes all this great feude. However I staid
and there supped, all of us being in great disorder from this, and more
from Cocke’s boy’s being ill, where my Lady Batten and Sir W. Batten
did come to town with an intent to lodge, and I was forced to go seek
a lodging which my W. Hewer did get me, viz., his own chamber in the
towne, whither I went and found it a very fine room, and there lay most
excellently.