25th (Lord’s day). Up, and several people about business come to me
by appointment relating to the office. Thence I to my closet about my
Tangier papers. At noon dined, and then I abroad by water, it raining
hard, thinking to have gone down to Woolwich, but I did not, but back
through bridge to White Hall, where, after I had again visited Sir
G. Carteret, and received his (and now his Lady’s) full content in my
proposal, I went to my Lord Sandwich, and having told him how Sir G.
Carteret received it, he did direct me to return to Sir G. Carteret, and
give him thanks for his kind reception of this offer, and that he would
the next day be willing to enter discourse with him about the business.
Which message I did presently do, and so left the business with great
joy to both sides. My Lord, I perceive, intends to give L5000 with
her, and expects about L800 per annum joynture. So by water home and to
supper and bed, being weary with long walking at Court, but had a Psalm
or two with my boy and Mercer before bed, which pleased me mightily.
This night Sir G. Carteret told me with great kindnesse that the order
of the Council did run for the making of Hater and Whitfield incapable
of any serving the King again, but that he had stopped the entry of it,
which he told me with great kindnesse, but the thing troubles me. After
dinner, before I went to White Hall, I went down to Greenwich by water,
thinking to have visited Sir J. Lawson, where, when I come, I find that
he is dead, and died this morning, at which I was much surprized;
and indeed the nation hath a great loss; though I cannot, without
dissembling, say that I am sorry for it, for he was a man never kind to
me at all. Being at White Hall, I visited Mr. Coventry, who, among other
talk, entered about the great question now in the House about the Duke’s
going to sea again; about which the whole House is divided. He did
concur with me that, for the Duke’s honour and safety, it were best,
after so great a service and victory and danger, not to go again; and,
above all, that the life of the Duke cannot but be a security to the
Crowne; if he were away, it being more easy to attempt anything upon
the King; but how the fleete will be governed without him, the
Prince--[Rupert]--being a man of no government and severe in council,
that no ordinary man can offer any advice against his; saying truly that
it had been better he had gone to Guinny, and that were he away, it were
easy to say how matters might be ordered, my Lord Sandwich being a man
of temper and judgment as much as any man he ever knew, and that upon
good observation he said this, and that his temper must correct the
Prince’s. But I perceive he is much troubled what will be the event of
the question. And so I left him.