29th. Up and by water to White Hall, where the Court full of waggons and
people ready to go out of towne. To the Harp and Ball, and there drank
and talked with Mary, she telling me in discourse that she lived
lately at my neighbour’s, Mr. Knightly, which made me forbear further
discourse. This end of the towne every day grows very bad of the plague.
The Mortality Bill is come to 267;

     [According to the Bills of Mortality, the total number of deaths in
     London for the week ending June 27th was 684, of which number 267
     were deaths from the plague.  The number of deaths rose week by week
     until September 19th, when the total was 8,297, and the deaths from
     the plague 7,165.  On September 26th the total had fallen to 6,460,
     and deaths from the plague to 5,533 The number fell gradually, week
     by week, till October 31st, when the total was 1,388, and deaths
     from the plague 1,031.  On November 7th there was a rise to 1,787
     and 1,414 respectively.  On November 14th the numbers had gone down
     to 1,359 and 1,050 respectively.  On December 12th the total had
     fallen to 442, and deaths from the plague to 243.  On December 19th
     there was a rise to 525 and 281 respectively.  The total of burials
     in 1665 was 97,506, of which number the plague claimed 68,596
     victims.]

which is about ninety more than the last: and of these but four in the
City, which is a great blessing to us. Thence to Creed, and with him up
and down about Tangier business, to no purpose. Took leave again of Mr.
Coventry; though I hope the Duke has not gone to stay, and so do others
too. So home, calling at Somersett House, where all are packing up
too: the Queene-Mother setting out for France this day to drink Bourbon
waters this year, she being in a consumption; and intends not to come
till winter come twelvemonths.

     [The Queen-Mother never came to England again.  She retired to her
     chateau at Colombes, near Paris, where she died in August, 1669,
     after a long illness; the immediate cause of her death being an
     opiate ordered by her physicians.  She was buried, September 12th,
     in the church of St. Denis.  Her funeral sermon was preached by
     Bossuet.  Sir John Reresby speaks of Queen Henrietta Maria in high
     terms.  He says that in the winter, 1659-60, although the Court of
     France was very splendid, there was a greater resort to the Palais
     Royal, “the good humour and wit of our Queen Mother, and the beauty
     of the Princess [Henrietta] her daughter, giving greater invitation
     than the more particular humour of the French Queen, being a
     Spaniard.”  In another place he says: “Her majesty had a great
     affection for England, notwithstanding the severe usage she and hers
     had received from it.  Her discourse was much with the great men and
     ladies of France in praise of the people and of the country; of
     their courage, generosity, good nature; and would excuse all their
     miscarriages in relation to unfortunate effects of the late war, as
     if it were a convulsion of some desperate and infatuated persons,
     rather than from the genius and temper of the kingdom” (“Memoirs of
     Sir John Reresby,” ed.  Cartwright, pp. 43, 45).]

So by coach home, where at the office all the morning, and at noon
Mrs. Hunt dined with us. Very merry, and she a very good woman. To the
office, where busy a while putting some things in my office in order,
and then to letters till night. About 10 a’clock home, the days being
sensibly shorter before I have once kept a summer’s day by shutting
up office by daylight; but my life hath been still as it was in winter
almost. But I will for a month try what I can do by daylight. So home to
supper and to bed.