16th. Up and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to White Hall, where we
did our business with the Duke. Thence I to Westminster Hall and walked
up and down. Among others Ned Pickering met me and tells me how active
my Lord is at sea, and that my Lord Hinchingbroke is now at Rome,
and, by all report, a very noble and hopefull gentleman. Thence to Mr.
Povy’s, and there met Creed, and dined well after his old manner of
plenty and curiosity. But I sat in pain to think whether he would begin
with me again after dinner with his enquiry after my bill, but he did
not, but fell into other discourse, at which I was glad, but was vexed
this morning meeting of Creed at some bye questions that he demanded of
me about some such thing, which made me fear he meant that very matter,
but I perceive he did not. Thence to visit my Lady Sandwich and so to
a Tangier Committee, where a great company of the new Commissioners,
Lords, that in behalfe of my Lord Bellasses are very loud and busy and
call for Povy’s accounts, but it was a most sorrowful thing to see
how he answered to questions so little to the purpose, but to his owne
wrong. All the while I sensible how I am concerned in my bill of L100
and somewhat more. So great a trouble is fear, though in a case that at
the worst will bear enquiry. My Lord Barkeley was very violent against
Povy. But my Lord Ashly, I observe, is a most clear man in matters of
accounts, and most ingeniously did discourse and explain all matters.
We broke up, leaving the thing to a Committee of which I am one. Povy,
Creed, and I staid discoursing, I much troubled in mind seemingly for
the business, but indeed only on my own behalf, though I have no great
reason for it, but so painfull a thing is fear. So after considering how
to order business, Povy and I walked together as far as the New Exchange
and so parted, and I by coach home. To the office a while, then to
supper and to bed. This afternoon Secretary Bennet read to the Duke of
Yorke his letters, which say that Allen

     [Among the State Papers is a letter from Captain Thomas Allin to Sir
     Richard Fanshaw, dated from “The Plymouth, Cadiz Bay,” December