5th. Up very betimes to look some other papers, and then to White
Hall to a Committee of Tangier, where I offered my accounts with great
acceptation, and so had some good words and honour by it, and one or two
things done to my content in my business of Treasurer, but I do clearly
see that we shall lose our business of victualling, Sir Thomas Ingram
undertaking that it shall be done by persons there as cheap as we do
it, and give the seamen their full allowance and themselves give good
security here for performance of contract, upon which terms there is no
opposing it. This would trouble me, but that I hope when that fails to
spend my time to some good advantage other ways, and so shall permit it
all to God Almighty’s pleasure. Thence home to dinner, after ‘Change,
where great talke of the Dutch being fled and we in pursuit of them, and
that our ship Charity

     [Sir William Coventry and Sir William Penn to the Navy
     Commissioners, June 4th: “Engaged yesterday with the Dutch; they
     began to stand away at 3 p.m.  Chased them all the rest of the day
     and night; 20 considerable ships are destroyed and taken; we have
     only lost the Great Charity.  The Earl of Marlborough, Rear-Admiral
     Sansum, and Captain Kirby are slain, and Sir John Lawson wounded”
      (“Calendar of State Papers,” Domestic, 1664-65, p. 406).]

is lost upon our Captain’s, Wilkinson, and Lieutenant’s yielding, but of
this there is no certainty, save the report of some of the sicke men of
the Charity, turned adrift in a boat out of the Charity and taken up and
brought on shore yesterday to Sole Bay, and the newes hereof brought by
Sir Henry Felton. Home to dinner, and Creed with me. Then he and I down
to Deptford, did some business, and back again at night. He home, and
I to my office, and so to supper and to bed. This morning I had great
discourse with my Lord Barkeley about Mr. Hater, towards whom from a
great passion reproaching him with being a fanatique and dangerous for
me to keepe, I did bring him to be mighty calme and to ask me pardons
for what he had thought of him and to desire me to ask his pardon of
Hater himself for the ill words he did give him the other day alone at
White Hall (which was, that he had always thought him a man that was no
good friend to the King, but did never think it would breake out in a
thing of this nature), and did advise him to declare his innocence to
the Council and pray for his examination and vindication. Of which I
shall consider and say no more, but remember one compliment that in
great kindness to me he did give me, extolling my care and diligence,
that he did love me heartily for my owne sake, and more that he did will
me whatsoever I thought for Mr. Coventry’s sake, for though the world
did think them enemies, and to have an ill aspect, one to another, yet
he did love him with all his heart, which was a strange manner of noble
compliment, confessing his owning me as a confidant and favourite of Mr.
Coventry’s.