26th. Up, and, leaving my guests to make themselves ready, I to the
office, and thither comes Sir Jer. Smith and Sir Christopher Mings to
see me, being just come from Portsmouth and going down to the Fleete.
Here I sat and talked with them a good while and then parted, only Sir
Christopher Mings and I together by water to the Tower; and I find him
a very witty well-spoken fellow, and mighty free to tell his parentage,
being a shoemaker’s son, to whom he is now going, and I to the
‘Change, where I hear how the French have taken two and sunk one of our
merchant-men in the Streights, and carried the ships to Toulon; so that
there is no expectation but we must fall out with them. The ‘Change
pretty full, and the town begins to be lively again, though the streets
very empty, and most shops shut. So back again I and took boat and
called for Sir Christopher Mings at St. Katharine’s, who was followed
with some ordinary friends, of which, he says, he is proud, and so down
to Greenwich, the wind furious high, and we with our sail up till I made
it be taken down. I took him, it being 3 o’clock, to my lodgings and did
give him a good dinner and so parted, he being pretty close to me as
to any business of the fleete, knowing me to be a servant of my Lord
Sandwich’s. He gone I to the office till night, and then they come and
tell me my wife is come to towne, so I to her vexed at her coming,
but it was upon innocent business, so I was pleased and made her stay,
Captain Ferrers and his lady being yet there, and so I left them to
dance, and I to the office till past nine at night, and so to them and
there saw them dance very prettily, the Captain and his wife, my wife
and Mrs. Barbary, and Mercer and my landlady’s daughter, and then little
Mistress Frances Tooker and her mother, a pretty woman come to see
my wife. Anon to supper, and then to dance again (Golding being our
fiddler, who plays very well and all tunes) till past twelve at night,
and then we broke up and every one to bed, we make shift for all our
company, Mrs. Tooker being gone.