2nd. We having sailed all night (and I do wonder how they in the dark
could find the way) we got by morning to Gillingham, and thence all
walked to Chatham; and there with Commissioner Pett viewed the Yard; and
among other things, a teame of four horses come close by us, he being
with me, drawing a piece of timber that I am confident one man could
easily have carried upon his back. I made the horses be taken away,
and a man or two to take the timber away with their hands. This the
Commissioner did see, but said nothing, but I think had cause to be
ashamed of. We walked, he and I and Cocke, to the Hill-house, where
we find Sir W. Pen in bed and there much talke and much dissembling of
kindnesse from him, but he is a false rogue, and I shall not trust him,
but my being there did procure his consent to have his silk carried away
before the money received, which he would not have done for Cocke I am
sure. Thence to Rochester, walked to the Crowne, and while dinner was
getting ready, I did there walk to visit the old Castle ruines, which
hath been a noble place, and there going up I did upon the stairs
overtake three pretty mayds or women and took them up with me, and I
did ‘baiser sur mouches et toucher leur mains’ and necks to my great
pleasure: but, Lord! to see what a dreadfull thing it is to look down
the precipices, for it did fright me mightily, and hinder me of much
pleasure which I would have made to myself in the company of these
three, if it had not been for that. The place hath been very noble and
great and strong in former ages. So to walk up and down the Cathedral,
and thence to the Crowne, whither Mr. Fowler, the Mayor of the towne,
was come in his gowne, and is a very reverend magistrate. After I had
eat a bit, not staying to eat with them, I went away, and so took horses
and to Gravesend, and there staid not, but got a boat, the sicknesse
being very much in the towne still, and so called on board my Lord
Bruncker and Sir John Minnes, on board one of the East Indiamen at
Erith, and there do find them full of envious complaints for the
pillageing of the ships, but I did pacify them, and discoursed about
making money of some of the goods, and do hope to be the better by it
honestly. So took leave (Madam Williams being here also with my Lord),
and about 8 o’clock got to Woolwich and there supped and mighty pleasant
with my wife, who is, for ought I see, all friends with her mayds, and
so in great joy and content to bed.