23rd. Up, and whereas I had appointed Mr. Hater and Will to come betimes
to the office to meet me about business there, I was called upon as soon
as ready by Mr. Andrews to my great content, and he and I to our Tangier
accounts, where I settled, to my great joy, all my accounts with him,
and, which is more, cleared for my service to the contractors since the
last sum I received of them, L222 13s. profit to myself, and received
the money actually in the afternoon. After he was gone comes by a
pretence of mine yesterday old Delks the waterman, with his daughter
Robins, and several times to and again, he leaving her with me, about
the getting of his son Robins off, who was pressed yesterday again....
All the afternoon at my office mighty busy writing letters, and received
a very kind and good one from my Lord Sandwich of his arrival with the
fleete at Solebay, and the joy he has at my last newes he met with, of
the marriage of my Lady Jemimah; and he tells me more, the good newes
that all our ships, which were in such danger that nobody would insure
upon them, from the Eastland,

     [Eastland was a name given to the eastern countries of Europe.  The
     Eastland Company, or Company of Merchants trading to the East
     Country, was incorporated in Queen Elizabeth’s reign (anno 21), and
     the charter was confirmed 13 Car. II. They were also called “The
     Merchants of Elbing.”]

were all safe arrived, which I am sure is a great piece of good luck,
being in much more danger than those of Hambrough which were lost,
and their value much greater at this time to us. At night home, much
contented with this day’s work, and being at home alone looking over
my papers, comes a neighbour of ours hard by to speak with me about
business of the office, one Mr. Fuller, a great merchant, but not my
acquaintance, but he come drunk, and would have had me gone and drunk
with him at home, or have let him send for wine hither, but I would do
neither, nor offered him any, but after some sorry discourse parted, and
I up to [my] chamber and to bed.