3rd. Up, and walked with my boy (whom, because of my wife’s making him
idle, I dare not leave at home) walked first to Salsbury court, there to
excuse my not being at home at dinner to Mrs. Turner, who I perceive
is vexed, because I do not serve her in something against the great
feasting for her husband’s Reading--[On his appointment as Reader in
Law.]--in helping her to some good penn’eths, but I care not. She was
dressing herself by the fire in her chamber, and there took occasion to
show me her leg, which indeed is the finest I ever saw, and she not a
little proud of it. Thence to my Lord Bellasses; thence to Mr. Povy’s,
and so up and down at that end of the town about several businesses, it
being a brave frosty day and good walking. So back again on foot to the
‘Change, in my way taking my books from binding from my bookseller’s.
My bill for the rebinding of some old books to make them suit with my
study, cost me, besides other new books in the same bill, L3; but it
will be very handsome. At the ‘Change did several businesses, and here
I hear that newes is come from Deale, that the same day my Lord Sandwich
sailed thence with the fleete, that evening some Dutch men of warr were
seen on the back side of the Goodwin, and, by all conjecture, must be
seen by my Lord’s fleete; which, if so, they must engage. Thence, being
invited, to my uncle Wight’s, where the Wights all dined; and, among
the others, pretty Mrs. Margaret, who indeed is a very pretty lady; and
though by my vowe it costs me 12d. a kiss after the first, yet I did
adventure upon a couple. So home, and among other letters found one from
Jane, that is newly gone, telling me how her mistresse won’t pay her her
Quarter’s wages, and withal tells me how her mistress will have the boy
sit 3 or 4 hours together in the dark telling of stories, but speaks of
nothing but only her indiscretion in undervaluing herself to do it, but
I will remedy that, but am vexed she should get some body to write so
much because of making it publique. Then took coach and to visit my Lady
Sandwich, where she discoursed largely to me her opinion of a match,
if it could be thought fit by my Lord, for my Lady Jemimah, with Sir
G. Carteret’s eldest son; but I doubt he hath yet no settled estate
in land. But I will inform myself, and give her my opinion. Then Mrs.
Pickering (after private discourse ended, we going into the other room)
did, at my Lady’s command, tell me the manner of a masquerade

     [The masquerade at Court took place on the 2nd, and is referred to
     by Evelyn, who was present, in his Diary.  Some amusing incidents
     connected with the entertainment are related in the “Grammont
     Memoirs” (chapter vii.).]

before the King and Court the other day. Where six women (my Lady
Castlemayne and Duchesse of Monmouth being two of them) and six men (the
Duke of Monmouth and Lord Arran and Monsieur Blanfort, being three of
them) in vizards, but most rich and antique dresses, did dance admirably
and most gloriously. God give us cause to continue the mirthe! So home,
and after awhile at my office to supper and to bed.