31st. Up and, after putting several things in order to my removal,
to Woolwich; the plague having a great encrease this week, beyond all
expectation of almost 2,000, making the general Bill 7,000, odd 100;
and the plague above 6,000. I down by appointment to Greenwich, to our
office, where I did some business, and there dined with our company and
Sir W. Boreman, and Sir The. Biddulph, at Mr. Boreman’s, where a good
venison pasty, and after a good merry dinner I to my office, and there
late writing letters, and then to Woolwich by water, where pleasant with
my wife and people, and after supper to bed. Thus this month ends with
great sadness upon the publick, through the greatness of the plague
every where through the kingdom almost. Every day sadder and sadder news
of its encrease. In the City died this week 7,496 and of them 6,102 of
the plague. But it is feared that the true number of the dead, this week
is near 10,000; partly from the poor that cannot be taken notice of,
through the greatness of the number, and partly from the Quakers and
others that will not have any bell ring for them. Our fleete gone out to
find the Dutch, we having about 100 sail in our fleete, and in them the
Soveraigne one; so that it is a better fleete than the former with the
Duke was. All our fear is that the Dutch should be got in before
them; which would be a very great sorrow to the publick, and to me
particularly, for my Lord Sandwich’s sake. A great deal of money being
spent, and the kingdom not in a condition to spare, nor a parliament
without much difficulty to meet to give more. And to that; to have it
said, what hath been done by our late fleetes? As to myself I am very
well, only in fear of the plague, and as much of an ague by being
forced to go early and late to Woolwich, and my family to lie there
continually. My late gettings have been very great to my great content,
and am likely to have yet a few more profitable jobbs in a little while;
for which Tangier, and Sir W. Warren I am wholly obliged to.