1553, it reverted to the Crown, and was granted in 1604 to Henry
     Percy, Earl of Northumberland.  It still belongs to the Duke of
     Northumberland.]

and there I took water, in our way he discoursing of the wantonnesse of
the Court, and how it minds nothing else, and I saying that that would
leave the King shortly if he did not leave it, he told me “No,” for the
King do spend most of his time in feeling and kissing them naked... But
this lechery will never leave him. Here I took boat (leaving him there)
and down to the Tower, where I hear the Duke of Albemarle is, and I to
Lumbard Streete, but can get no money. So upon the Exchange, which is
very empty, God knows! and but mean people there. The newes for certain
that the Dutch are come with their fleete before Margett, and some men
were endeavouring to come on shore when the post come away, perhaps
to steal some sheep. But, Lord! how Colvill talks of the businesse of
publique revenue like a madman, and yet I doubt all true; that nobody
minds it, but that the King and Kingdom must speedily be undone, and
rails at my Lord about the prizes, but I think knows not my relation to
him. Here I endeavoured to satisfy all I could, people about Bills of
Exchange from Tangier, but it is only with good words, for money I have
not, nor can get. God knows what will become of all the King’s matters
in a little time, for he runs in debt every day, and nothing to pay them
looked after. Thence I walked to the Tower; but, Lord! how empty the
streets are and melancholy, so many poor sick people in the streets
full of sores; and so many sad stories overheard as I walk, every body
talking of this dead, and that man sick, and so many in this place, and
so many in that. And they tell me that, in Westminster, there is never
a physician and but one apothecary left, all being dead; but that there
are great hopes of a great decrease this week: God send it! At the Tower
found my Lord Duke and Duchesse at dinner; so I sat down. And much good
cheer, the Lieutenant and his lady, and several officers with the Duke.
But, Lord! to hear the silly talk that was there, would make one mad;
the Duke having none almost but fools about him. Much of their talke
about the Dutch coming on shore, which they believe they may some of
them have been and steal sheep, and speak all in reproach of them in
whose hands the fleete is; but, Lord helpe him, there is something will
hinder him and all the world in going to sea, which is want of victuals;
for we have not wherewith to answer our service; and how much better it
would have been if the Duke’s advice had been taken for the fleete
to have gone presently out; but, God helpe the King! while no better
counsels are given, and what is given no better taken. Thence after
dinner receiving many commands from the Duke, I to our office on the
Hill, and there did a little business and to Colvill’s again, and so
took water at the Tower, and there met with Captain Cocke, and he down
with me to Greenwich, I having received letters from my Lord Sandwich
to-day, speaking very high about the prize goods, that he would have us
to fear nobody, but be very confident in what we have done, and not
to confess any fault or doubt of what he hath done; for the King hath
allowed it, and do now confirm it, and sent orders, as he says, for
nothing to be disturbed that his Lordshipp hath ordered therein as to
the division of the goods to the fleete; which do comfort us, but my
Lord writes to me that both he and I may hence learn by what we see in
this business. But that which pleases me best is that Cocke tells me
that he now understands that Fisher was set on in this business by the
design of some of the Duke of Albemarle’s people, Warcupp and others,
who lent him money to set him out in it, and he has spent high. Who
now curse him for a rogue to take L100 when he might have had as well
L1,500, and they are mightily fallen out about it. Which in due time
shall be discovered, but that now that troubles me afresh is, after I
am got to the office at Greenwich that some new troubles are come, and
Captain Cocke’s house is beset before and behind with guards, and more,
I do fear they may come to my office here to search for Cocke’s goods
and find some small things of my clerk’s. So I assisted them in helping
to remove their small trade, but by and by I am told that it is only
the Custome House men who came to seize the things that did lie at Mr.
Glanville’s, for which they did never yet see our Transire, nor did
know of them till to-day. So that my fear is now over, for a transire
is ready for them. Cocke did get a great many of his goods to London
to-day. To the Still Yarde, which place, however, is now shut up of
the plague; but I was there, and we now make no bones of it. Much talke
there is of the Chancellor’s speech and the King’s at the Parliament’s
meeting, which are very well liked; and that we shall certainly, by
their speeches, fall out with France at this time, together with the
Dutch, which will find us work. Late at the office entering my Journall
for 8 days past, the greatness of my business hindering me of late to
put it down daily, but I have done it now very true and particularly,
and hereafter will, I hope, be able to fall into my old way of doing it
daily. So to my lodging, and there had a good pullet to my supper, and
so to bed, it being very cold again, God be thanked for it!