4th. Lay long in bed discoursing with my wife about her mayds, which
by Jane’s going away in discontent and against my opinion do make some
trouble between my wife and me. But these are but foolish troubles and
so not to be set to heart, yet it do disturb me mightily these things.
To my office, and there all the morning. At noon being invited, I to
the Sun behind the ‘Change, to dinner to my Lord Belasses, where a great
deal of discourse with him, and some good, among others at table he told
us a very handsome passage of the King’s sending him his message about
holding out the town of Newarke, of which he was then governor for the
King. This message he sent in a sluggbullet, being writ in cypher, and
wrapped up in lead and swallowed. So the messenger come to my Lord and
told him he had a message from the King, but it was yet in his belly;
so they did give him some physique, and out it come. This was a month
before the King’s flying to the Scotts; and therein he told him that at
such a day, being the 3d or 6th of May, he should hear of his being come
to the Scotts, being assured by the King of France that in coming to
them he should be used with all the liberty, honour, and safety, that
could be desired. And at the just day he did come to the Scotts. He told
us another odd passage: how the King having newly put out Prince Rupert
of his generallshipp, upon some miscarriage at Bristoll, and Sir Richard
Willis

     [Sir Richard Willis, the betrayer of the Royalists, was one of the
     “Sealed Knot.”  When the Restoration had become a certainty, he
     wrote to Clarendon imploring him to intercede for him with the king
     (see Lister’s “Life of Clarendon,” vol. iii., p. 87).]

of his governorship of Newarke, at the entreaty of the gentry of the
County, and put in my Lord Bellasses, the great officers of the King’s
army mutinyed, and come in that manner with swords drawn, into the
market-place of the towne where the King was; which the King hearing,
says, “I must to horse.” And there himself personally, when every body
expected they should have been opposed, the King come, and cried to the
head of the mutineers, which was Prince Rupert, “Nephew, I command you
to be gone.” So the Prince, in all his fury and discontent, withdrew,
and his company scattered, which they say was the greatest piece of
mutiny in the world. Thence after dinner home to my office, and in the
evening was sent to by Jane that I would give her her wages. So I sent
for my wife to my office, and told her that rather than be talked on
I would give her all her wages for this Quarter coming on, though two
months is behind, which vexed my wife, and we begun to be angry, but I
took myself up and sent her away, but was cruelly vexed in my mind that
all my trouble in this world almost should arise from my disorders in
my family and the indiscretion of a wife that brings me nothing almost
(besides a comely person) but only trouble and discontent. She gone I
late at my business, and then home to supper and to bed.