21st. Up, and to the office (having a mighty pain in my forefinger of
my left hand, from a strain that it received last night) in struggling
‘avec la femme que je’ mentioned yesterday, where busy till noon, and
then my wife being busy in going with her woman to a hot-house to bathe
herself, after her long being within doors in the dirt, so that she now
pretends to a resolution of being hereafter very clean. How long it will
hold I can guess. I dined with Sir W. Batten and my Lady, they being now
a’days very fond of me. So to the ‘Change, and off of the ‘Change with
Mr. Wayth to a cook’s shop, and there dined again for discourse with him
about Hamaccos

     [Or hammock-battens: cleats or battens nailed to the sides of a
     vessel’s beams, from which to suspend the seamen’s hammocks.]

and the abuse now practised in tickets, and more like every day to be.
Also of the great profit Mr. Fen makes of his place, he being, though he
demands but 5 per cent. of all he pays, and that is easily computed,
but very little pleased with any man that gives him no more. So to the
office, and after office my Lord Brunkerd carried me to Lincolne’s
Inne Fields, and there I with my Lady Sandwich (good lady) talking of
innocent discourse of good housewifery and husbands for her daughters,
and the luxury and looseness of the times and other such things till
past 10 o’clock at night, and so by coach home, where a little at
my office, and so to supper and to bed. My Lady tells me how my Lord
Castlemayne is coming over from France, and is believed will be made
friends with his Lady again. What mad freaks the Mayds of Honour at
Court have: that Mrs. Jenings, one of the Duchesses mayds, the other
day dressed herself like an orange wench, and went up and down and cried
oranges; till falling down, or by such accident, though in the evening,
her fine shoes were discerned, and she put to a great deale of shame;
that such as these tricks being ordinary, and worse among them, thereby
few will venture upon them for wives: my Lady Castlemayne will in
merriment say that her daughter (not above a year old or two) will be
the first mayde in the Court that will be married. This day my Lord
Sandwich writ me word from the Downes, that he is like to be in towne
this week.