November 1st. Lay very long in bed discoursing with Mr. Hill of most
things of a man’s life, and how little merit do prevail in the world,
but only favour; and that, for myself, chance without merit brought me
in; and that diligence only keeps me so, and will, living as I do among
so many lazy people that the diligent man becomes necessary, that they
cannot do anything without him, and so told him of my late business of
the victualling, and what cares I am in to keepe myself having to do
with people of so different factions at Court, and yet must be fair with
them all, which was very pleasant discourse for me to tell, as well as
he seemed to take it, for him to hear. At last up, and it being a very
foule day for raine and a hideous wind, yet having promised I would go
by water to Erith, and bearing sayle was in danger of oversetting, but
ordered them take down their sayle, and so cold and wet got thither, as
they had ended their dinner. How[ever], I dined well, and after dinner
all on shore, my Lord Bruncker with us to Mrs. Williams’s lodgings,
and Sir W. Batten, Sir Edmund Pooly, and others; and there, it being
my Lord’s birth-day, had every one a green riband tied in our hats very
foolishly; and methinks mighty disgracefully for my Lord to have his
folly so open to all the world with this woman. But by and by Sir W.
Batten and I took coach, and home to Boreman, and so going home by the
backside I saw Captain Cocke ‘lighting out of his coach (having been at
Erith also with her but not on board) and so he would come along with me
to my lodging, and there sat and supped and talked with us, but we were
angry a little a while about our message to him the other day about
bidding him keepe from the office or his owne office, because of his
black dying. I owned it and the reason of it, and would have been glad
he had been out of the house, but I could not bid him go, and so supped,
and after much other talke of the sad condition and state of the King’s
matters we broke up, and my friend and I to bed. This night coming with
Sir W. Batten into Greenwich we called upon Coll. Cleggatt, who tells
us for certaine that the King of Denmark hath declared to stand for the
King of England, but since I hear it is wholly false.