5th. Up and to the office, where very busy about several businesses
all the morning. At noon empty, yet without stomach to dinner, having
spoiled myself with fasting yesterday, and so filled with wind. In
the afternoon by water, calling Mr. Stevens (who is with great trouble
paying of seamen of their tickets at Deptford) and to London, to look
for Captain Kingdom whom we found at home about 5 o’clock. I tried him,
and he promised to follow us presently to the East India House to sign
papers to-night in order to the settling the business of my receiving
money for Tangier. We went and stopt the officer there to shut up. He
made us stay above an houre. I sent for him; he comes, but was not found
at home, but abroad on other business, and brings a paper saying that he
had been this houre looking for the Lord Ashley’s order. When he looks
for it, that is not the paper. He would go again to look; kept us
waiting till almost 8 at night. Then was I to go home by water this
weather and darke, and to write letters by the post, besides keeping
the East India officers there so late. I sent for him again; at last he
comes, and says he cannot find the paper (which is a pretty thing to lay
orders for L100,000 no better). I was angry; he told me I ought to give
people ease at night, and all business was to be done by day. I answered
him sharply, that I did [not] make, nor any honest man, any difference
between night and day in the King’s business, and this was such, and
my Lord Ashley should know. He answered me short. I told him I knew the
time (meaning the Rump’s time) when he did other men’s business with
more diligence. He cried, “Nay, say not so,” and stopped his mouth, not
one word after. We then did our business without the order in less than
eight minutes, which he made me to no purpose stay above two hours for
the doing. This made him mad, and so we exchanged notes, and I had notes
for L14,000 of the Treasurer of the Company, and so away and by water to
Greenwich and wrote my letters, and so home late to bed.