21st. Called up, by message from Lord Bruncker and the rest of my
fellows, that they will meet me at the Duke of Albemarle’s this morning;
so I up, and weary, however, got thither before them, and spoke with my
Lord, and with him and other gentlemen to walk in the Parke, where, I
perceive, he spends much of his time, having no whither else to go; and
here I hear him speake of some Presbyter people that he caused to be
apprehended yesterday, at a private meeting in Covent Garden, which
he would have released upon paying L5 per man to the poor, but it was
answered, they would not pay anything; so he ordered them to another
prison from the guard. By and by comes my fellow-officers, and the Duke
walked in, and to counsel with us; and that being done we departed,
and Sir W. Batten and I to the office, where, after I had done a little
business, I to his house to dinner, whither comes Captain Cocke, for
whose epicurisme a dish of partriges was sent for, and still gives me
reason to think is the greatest epicure in the world. Thence, after
dinner, I by water to Sir W. Warren’s and with him two hours, talking of
things to his and my profit, and particularly good advice from him what
use to make of Sir G. Carteret’s kindnesse to me and my interest in him,
with exceeding good cautions for me not using it too much nor obliging
him to fear by prying into his secrets, which it were easy for me to
do. Thence to my Lord Bruncker, at Greenwich, and Sir J. Minnes by
appointment, to looke after the lodgings appointed for us there for our
office, which do by no means please me, they being in the heart of all
the labourers and workmen there, which makes it as unsafe as to be, I
think, at London. Mr. Hugh May, who is a most ingenuous man, did show us
the lodgings, and his acquaintance I am desirous of. Thence walked, it
being now dark, to Sir J. Minnes’s, and there staid at the door talking
with him an hour while messengers went to get a boat for me, to carry
me to Woolwich, but all to no purpose; so I was forced to walk it in
the darke, at ten o’clock at night, with Sir J. Minnes’s George with me,
being mightily troubled for fear of the doggs at Coome farme, and more
for fear of rogues by the way, and yet more because of the plague which
is there, which is very strange, it being a single house, all alone
from the towne, but it seems they use to admit beggars, for their owne
safety, to lie in their barns, and they brought it to them; but I bless
God I got about eleven of the clock well to my wife, and giving 4s. in
recompence to George, I to my wife, and having first viewed her last
piece of drawing since I saw her, which is seven or eight days, which
pleases me beyond any thing in the world, to bed with great content but
weary.