25th. Up and to my Lord Sandwich’s, where several Commanders, of whom I
took the state of all their ships, and of all could find not above four
capable of going out. The truth is, the want of victuals being the
whole overthrow of this yeare both at sea, and now at the Nore here and
Portsmouth, where all the fleete lies. By and by comes down my Lord, and
then he and I an houre together alone upon private discourse. He tells
me that Mr. Coventry and he are not reconciled, but declared enemies:
the only occasion of it being, he tells me, his ill usage from him about
the first fight, wherein he had no right done him, which, methinks, is a
poor occasion, for, in my conscience, that was no design of Coventry’s.
But, however, when I asked my Lord whether it were not best, though
with some condescension, to be friends with him, he told me it was not
possible, and so I stopped. He tells me, as very private, that there
are great factions at the Court between the King’s party and the Duke of
Yorke’s, and that the King, which is a strange difficulty, do favour my
Lord in opposition to the Duke’s party; that my Lord Chancellor, being,
to be sure, the patron of the Duke’s, it is a mystery whence it should
be that Mr. Coventry is looked upon by him [Clarendon] as an enemy to
him; that if he had a mind himself to be out of this employment, as Mr.
Coventry, he believes, wishes, and himself and I do incline to wish it
also, in many respects, yet he believes he shall not be able, because of
the King, who will keepe him in on purpose, in opposition to the other
party; that Prince Rupert and he are all possible friends in the world;
that Coventry hath aggravated this business of the prizes, though never
so great plundering in the world as while the Duke and he were at sea;
and in Sir John Lawson’s time he could take and pillage, and then sink
a whole ship in the Streights, and Coventry say nothing to it; that my
Lord Arlington is his fast friend; that the Chancellor is cold to him,
and though I told him that I and the world do take my Lord Chancellor,
in his speech the other day, to have said as much as could be wished,
yet he thinks he did not. That my Lord Chancellor do from hence begin to
be cold to him, because of his seeing him and Arlington so great:
that nothing at Court is minded but faction and pleasure, and nothing
intended of general good to the kingdom by anybody heartily; so that he
believes with me, in a little time confusion will certainly come over
all the nation. He told me how a design was carried on a while ago, for
the Duke of Yorke to raise an army in the North, and to be the Generall
of it, and all this without the knowledge or advice of the Duke of
Albemarle, which when he come to know, he was so vexed, they were fain
to let it fall to content him: that his matching with the family of Sir
G. Carteret do make the difference greater between Coventry and him,
they being enemies; that the Chancellor did, as every body else, speak
well of me the other day, but yet was, at the Committee for Tangier,
angry that I should offer to suffer a bill of exchange to be protested.
So my Lord did bid me take heed, for that I might easily suppose I
could not want enemies, no more than others. In all he speaks with the
greatest trust and love and confidence in what I say or do, that a man
can do. After this discourse ended we sat down to dinner and mighty
merry, among other things, at the Bill brought into the House to make
it felony to break bulke, which, as my Lord says well, will make that
no prizes shall be taken, or, if taken, shall be sunke after plundering;
and the Act for the method of gathering this last L1,250,000 now voted,
and how paid wherein are several strange imperfections. After dinner
my Lord by a ketch down to Erith, where the Bezan was, it blowing these
last two days and now both night and day very hard southwardly, so that
it has certainly drove the Dutch off the coast. My Lord being gone I
to the office, and there find Captain Ferrers, who tells me his wife is
come to town to see him, having not seen him since 15 weeks ago at his
first going to sea last. She is now at a Taverne and stays all night, so
I was obliged to give him my house and chamber to lie in, which he with
great modesty and after much force took, and so I got Mr. Evelyn’s coach
to carry her thither, and the coach coming back, I with Mr. Evelyn to
Deptford, where a little while with him doing a little business, and so
in his coach back again to my lodgings, and there sat with Mrs. Ferrers
two hours, and with my little girle, Mistress Frances Tooker, and very
pleasant. Anon the Captain comes, and then to supper very merry, and so
I led them to bed. And so to bed myself, having seen my pretty little
girle home first at the next door.