20th. Up, and was trimmed, but not time enough to save my Lord
Bruncker’s coach or Sir J. Minnes’s, and so was fain to walk to Lambeth
on foot, but it was a very fine frosty walke, and great pleasure in
it, but troublesome getting over the River for ice. I to the Duke of
Albemarle, whither my brethren were all come, but I was not too late.
There we sat in discourse upon our Navy business an houre, and thence in
my Lord Bruncker’s coach alone, he walking before (while I staid
awhile talking with Sir G. Downing about the Act, in which he is horrid
troublesome) to the Old Exchange. Thence I took Sir Ellis Layton to
Captain Cocke’s, where my Lord Bruncker and Lady Williams dine, and we
all mighty merry; but Sir Ellis Layton one of the best companions at
a meale in the world. After dinner I to the Exchange to see whether my
pretty seamstress be come again or no, and I find she is, so I to her,
saluted her over her counter in the open Exchange above, and mightily
joyed to see her, poor pretty woman! I must confess I think her a great
beauty. After laying out a little money there for two pair of thread
stockings, cost 8s., I to Lumbard Streete to see some business to-night
there at the goldsmith’s, among others paying in L1258 to Viner for
my Lord Sandwich’s use upon Cocke’s account. I was called by my Lord
Bruncker in his coach with his mistresse, and Mr. Cottle the lawyer,
our acquaintance at Greenwich, and so home to Greenwich, and thence I to
Mrs. Penington, and had a supper from the King’s Head for her, and there
mighty merry and free as I used to be with her, and at last, late, I did
pray her to undress herself into her nightgowne, that I might see how
to have her picture drawne carelessly (for she is mighty proud of that
conceit), and I would walk without in the streete till she had done. So
I did walk forth, and whether I made too many turns or no in the darke
cold frosty night between the two walls up to the Parke gate I know not,
but she was gone to bed when I come again to the house, upon pretence of
leaving some papers there, which I did on purpose by her consent. So
I away home, and was there sat up for to be spoken with my young Mrs.
Daniel, to pray me to speake for her husband to be a Lieutenant. I had
the opportunity here of kissing her again and again, and did answer that
I would be very willing to do him any kindnesse, and so parted, and I to
bed, exceedingly pleased in all my matters of money this month or two,
it having pleased God to bless me with several opportunities of good
sums, and that I have them in effect all very well paid, or in my power
to have. But two things trouble me; one, the sicknesse is increased
above 80 this weeke (though in my owne parish not one has died, though
six the last weeke); the other, most of all, which is, that I have so
complexed an account for these last two months for variety of layings
out upon Tangier, occasions and variety of gettings that I have not made
even with myself now these 3 or 4 months, which do trouble me mightily,
finding that I shall hardly ever come to understand them thoroughly
again, as I used to do my accounts when I was at home.