18th. Betimes, up, it being a fine frost, and walked it to Redriffe,
calling and drinking at Half-way house, thinking, indeed, to have
overtaken some of the people of our house, the women, who were to walk
the same walke, but I could not. So to London, and there visited my
wife, and was a little displeased to find she is so forward all of a
spurt to make much of her brother and sister since my last kindnesse to
him in getting him a place, but all ended well presently, and I to
the ‘Change and up and down to Kingdon and the goldsmith’s to meet Mr.
Stephens, and did get all my money matters most excellently cleared
to my complete satisfaction. Passing over Cornhill I spied young Mrs.
Daniel and Sarah, my landlady’s daughter, who are come, as I expected,
to towne, and did say they spied me and I dogged them to St. Martin’s,
where I passed by them being shy, and walked down as low as Ducke Lane
and enquired for some Spanish books, and so back again and they were
gone. So to the ‘Change, hoping to see them in the streete, and missing
them, went back again thither and back to the ‘Change, but no sight of
them, so went after my business again, and, though late, was sent to by
Sir W. Warren (who heard where I was) to intreat me to come dine with
him, hearing that I lacked a dinner, at the Pope’s Head; and there with
Mr. Hinton, the goldsmith, and others, very merry; but, Lord! to see
how Dr. Hinton come in with a gallant or two from Court, and do so call
“Cozen” Mr. Hinton, the goldsmith, but I that know him to be a beggar
and a knave, did make great sport in my mind at it.

     [John Hinton, M.D., a strong royalist, who attended Henrietta Maria
     in her confinement at Exeter when she gave birth to the Princess
     Henrietta.  He was knighted by Charles II., and appointed physician
     in ordinary to the king and queen.  His knighthood was a reward for
     having procured a private advance of money from his kinsman, the
     goldsmith, to enable the Duke of Albemarle to pay the army (see
     “Memorial to King Charles II. from Sir John Hinton, A.D. 1679,”
      printed in Ellis’s “Original Letters,” 3rd series, vol. iv.,
     p  296).]

After dinner Sir W. Warren and I alone in another room a little while
talking about business, and so parted, and I hence, my mind full
of content in my day’s worke, home by water to Greenwich, the river
beginning to be very full of ice, so as I was a little frighted, but got
home well, it being darke. So having no mind to do any business, went
home to my lodgings, and there got little Mrs. Tooker, and Mrs. Daniel,
the daughter, and Sarah to my chamber to cards and sup with me, when
in comes Mr. Pierce to me, who tells me how W. Howe has been examined
on shipboard by my Lord Bruncker to-day, and others, and that he has
charged him out of envy with sending goods under my Lord’s seale and
in my Lord Bruncker’s name, thereby to get them safe passage, which,
he tells me, is false, but that he did use my name to that purpose, and
hath acknowledged it to my Lord Bruncker, but do also confess to me that
one parcel he thinks he did use my Lord Bruncker’s name, which do
vexe me mightily that my name should be brought in question about such
things, though I did not say much to him of my discontent till I have
spoke with my Lord Bruncker about it. So he being gone, being to go
to Oxford to-morrow, we to cards again late, and so broke up, I having
great pleasure with my little girle, Mrs. Tooker.