3rd (Lord’s day). Up; and put on my coloured silk suit very fine, and my
new periwigg, bought a good while since, but durst not wear, because the
plague was in Westminster when I bought it; and it is a wonder what will
be the fashion after the plague is done, as to periwiggs, for nobody
will dare to buy any haire, for fear of the infection, that it had been
cut off of the heads of people dead of the plague. Before church time
comes Mr. Hill (Mr. Andrews failing because he was to receive the
Sacrament), and to church, where a sorry dull parson, and so home and
most excellent company with Mr. Hill and discourse of musique. I took
my Lady Pen home, and her daughter Pegg, and merry we were; and after
dinner I made my wife show them her pictures, which did mad Pegg Pen,
who learns of the same man and cannot do so well. After dinner left them
and I by water to Greenwich, where much ado to be suffered to come into
the towne because of the sicknesse, for fear I should come from London,
till I told them who I was. So up to the church, where at the door
I find Captain Cocke in my Lord Brunker’s coach, and he come out and
walked with me in the church-yarde till the church was done, talking of
the ill government of our Kingdom, nobody setting to heart the business
of the Kingdom, but every body minding their particular profit or
pleasures, the King himself minding nothing but his ease, and so we let
things go to wracke. This arose upon considering what we shall do for
money when the fleete comes in, and more if the fleete should not meet
with the Dutch, which will put a disgrace upon the King’s actions, so as
the Parliament and Kingdom will have the less mind to give more money,
besides so bad an account of the last money, we fear, will be given, not
half of it being spent, as it ought to be, upon the Navy. Besides, it is
said that at this day our Lord Treasurer cannot tell what the profit of
Chimney money is, what it comes to per annum, nor looks whether that
or any other part of the revenue be duly gathered as it ought; the very
money that should pay the City the L200,000 they lent the King, being
all gathered and in the hands of the Receiver and hath been long and
yet not brought up to pay the City, whereas we are coming to borrow 4 or
L500,000 more of the City, which will never be lent as is to be feared.
Church being done, my Lord Bruncker, Sir J. Minnes, and I up to the
Vestry at the desire of the justices of the Peace, Sir Theo. Biddulph
and Sir W. Boreman and Alderman Hooker, in order to the doing something
for the keeping of the plague from growing; but Lord! to consider the
madness of the people of the town, who will (because they are forbid)
come in crowds along with the dead corps to see them buried; but we
agreed on some orders for the prevention thereof. Among other stories,
one was very passionate, methought, of a complaint brought against a
man in the towne for taking a child from London from an infected house.
Alderman Hooker told us it was the child of a very able citizen in
Gracious Street, a saddler, who had buried all the rest of his children
of the plague, and himself and wife now being shut up and in despair of
escaping, did desire only to save the life of this little child; and so
prevailed to have it received stark-naked into the arms of a friend, who
brought it (having put it into new fresh clothes) to Greenwich; where
upon hearing the story, we did agree it should be permitted to be
received and kept in the towne. Thence with my Lord Bruncker to Captain
Cocke’s, where we mighty merry and supped, and very late I by water to
Woolwich, in great apprehensions of an ague. Here was my Lord Bruncker’s
lady of pleasure, who, I perceive, goes every where with him; and he,
I find, is obliged to carry her, and make all the courtship to her that
can be.