27th. Up betimes to Mr. Povy’s, and there did sign and seal my agreement
with him about my place of being Treasurer for Tangier, it being the
greatest part of it drawnout of a draught of his own drawing up, only I
have added something here and there in favour of myself. Thence to the
Duke of Albemarle, the first time that we officers of the Navy have
waited upon him since the Duke of Yorke’s going, who hath deputed him to
be Admirall in his absence. And I find him a quiet heavy man, that will
help business when he can, and hinder nothing, and am very well pleased
with our attendance on him. I did afterwards alone give him thanks for
his favour to me about my Tangier business, which he received kindly,
and did speak much of his esteem of me. Thence, and did the same to Sir
H. Bennet, who did the like to me very fully, and did give me all his
letters lately come from hence for me to read, which I returned in the
afternoon to him. Thence to Mrs. Martin, who, though her husband is gone
away, as he writes, like a fool into France, yet is as simple and wanton
as ever she was, with much I made myself merry and away. So to my
Lord Peterborough’s; where Povy, Creed, Williamson, Auditor Beale, and
myself, and mighty merry to see how plainly my Lord and Povy did abuse
one another about their accounts, each thinking the other a foole, and I
thinking they were not either of them, in that point, much in the
wrong, though in everything, and even in this manner of reproaching one
another, very witty and pleasant. Among other things, we had here the
genteelest dinner and the neatest house that I have seen many a day,
and the latter beyond anything I ever saw in a nobleman’s house. Thence
visited my Lord Barkeley, and did sit discoursing with him in his
chamber a good while, and [he] mighty friendly to me about the same
business of Tangier. From that to other discourse of the times and the
want of money, and he said that the Parliament must be called again
soon, and more money raised, not by tax, for he said he believed the
people could not pay it, but he would have either a general excise upon
everything, or else that every city incorporate should pay a toll into
the King’s revenue, as he says it is in all the cities in the world; for
here a citizen hath no more laid on them than their neighbours in the
country, whereas, as a city, it ought to pay considerably to the King
for their charter; but I fear this will breed ill blood. Thence to Povy,
and after a little talk home to my office late. Then to supper and to
bed.