24th. Lay long, having a cold. Then to my Lord and sent him going to
Oxford, and I to my office, whither comes Sir William Batten now newly
from Oxford. I can gather nothing from him about my Lord Sandwich about
the business of the prizes, he being close, but he shewed me a bill
which hath been read in the House making all breaking of bulke for
the time to come felony, but it is a foolish Act, and will do no great
matter, only is calculated to my Lord Sandwich’s case. He shewed me
also a good letter printed from the Bishopp of Munster to the States of
Holland shewing the state of their case. Here we did some business and
so broke up and I to Cocke, where Mr. Evelyn was, to dinner, and there
merry, yet vexed again at publique matters, and to see how little heed
is had to the prisoners and sicke and wounded. Thence to my office, and
no sooner there but to my great surprise am told that my Lord Sandwich
is come to towne; so I presently to Boreman’s, where he is and there
found him: he mighty kind to me, but no opportunity of discourse private
yet, which he tells me he must have with me; only his business is sudden
to go to the fleece, to get out a few ships to drive away the Dutch. I
left him in discourse with Sir W. Batten and others, and myself to the
office till about 10 at night and so, letters being done, I to him again
to Captain Cocke’s, where he supped, and lies, and never saw him more
merry, and here is Charles Herbert, who the King hath lately knighted.

     [This person, erroneously called by Pepys Sir C. Herbert, will be
     best defined by subjoining the inscription on his monument in
     Westminster Abbey: “Sir Charles Harbord, Knight, third son of Sir
     Charles Harbord, Knight, Surveyor-General, and First Lieutenant of
     the Royall James, under the most noble and illustrious Captaine,
     Edward, Earle of Sandwich, Vice-Admirall of England, which, after a
     terrible fight, maintained to admiration against a squadron of the
     Holland fleet, above six hours, neere the Suffolk coast, having put
     off two fireships; at last, being utterly disabled, and few of her
     men remaining unhurt, was, by a third, unfortunately set on fire.
     But he (though he swome well) neglected to save himselfe, as some
     did, and out of perfect love to that worthy Lord, whom, for many
     yeares, he had constantly accompanyed, in all his honourable
     employments, and in all the engagements of the former warre, dyed
     with him, at the age of xxxii., much bewailed by his father, whom he
     never offended; and much beloved by all for his knowne piety,
     vertue, loyalty, fortitude, and fidelity.”--B.]

My Lord, to my great content, did tell me before them, that never
anything was read to the King and Council, all the chief Ministers of
State being there, as my letter about the Victualling was, and no more
said upon it than a most thorough consent to every word was said, and
directed, that it be pursued and practised. After much mirth, and
my Lord having travelled all night last night, he to bed, and we all
parted, I home.