28th. Up, and being ready I out to Mr. Colvill, the goldsmith’s, having
not for some days been in the streets; but now how few people I see, and
those looking like people that had taken leave of the world. I there,
and made even all accounts in the world between him and I, in a very
good condition, and I would have done the like with Sir Robert Viner,
but he is out of towne, the sicknesse being every where thereabouts. I
to the Exchange, and I think there was not fifty people upon it, and
but few more like to be as they told me, Sir G. Smith and others. Thus
I think to take adieu to-day of the London streets, unless it be to go
again to Viner’s. Home to dinner, and there W. Hewer brings me L119 he
hath received for my office disbursements, so that I think I have L1800
and more in the house, and, blessed be God! no money out but what I
can very well command and that but very little, which is much the
best posture I ever was in in my life, both as to the quantity and the
certainty I have of the money I am worth; having most of it in my own
hand. But then this is a trouble to me what to do with it, being myself
this day going to be wholly at Woolwich; but for the present I am
resolved to venture it in an iron chest, at least for a while. In the
afternoon I sent down my boy to Woolwich with some things before me, in
order to my lying there for good and all, and so I followed him. Just
now comes newes that the fleete is gone, or going this day, out again,
for which God be praised! and my Lord Sandwich hath done himself great
right in it, in getting so soon out again. I pray God, he may meet the
enemy. Towards the evening, just as I was fitting myself, comes W. Hewer
and shows me a letter which Mercer had wrote to her mother about a great
difference between my wife and her yesterday, and that my wife will have
her go away presently. This, together with my natural jealousy that some
bad thing or other may be in the way, did trouble me exceedingly, so as
I was in a doubt whether to go thither or no, but having fitted myself
and my things I did go, and by night got thither, where I met my wife
walking to the waterside with her paynter, Mr. Browne, and her mayds.
There I met Commissioner Pett, and my Lord Brunker, and the lady at his
house had been thereto-day, to see her. Commissioner Pett staid a very
little while, and so I to supper with my wife and Mr. Shelden, and so to
bed with great pleasure.