14th. Up, and my mind being at mighty ease from the dispatch of my
business so much yesterday, I down to Deptford to Sir G. Carteret, where
with him a great while, and a great deale of private talke concerning my
Lord Sandwich’s and his matters, and chiefly of the latter, I giving
him great deale of advice about the necessity of his having caution
concerning Fenn, and the many ways there are of his being abused by any
man in his place, and why he should not bring his son in to look after
his business, and more, to be a Commissioner of the Navy, which he
listened to and liked, and told me how much the King was his good
Master, and was sure not to deny him that or any thing else greater
than that, and I find him a very cunning man, whatever at other times
he seems to be, and among other things he told me he was not for the
fanfaroone

     [Fanfaron, French, from fanfare, a sounding of trumpets; hence, a
     swaggerer, or empty boaster.]

to make a show with a great title, as he might have had long since, but
the main thing to get an estate; and another thing, speaking of minding
of business, “By God,” says he, “I will and have already almost brought
it to that pass, that the King shall not be able to whip a cat, but I
must be at the tayle of it.” Meaning so necessary he is, and the King
and my Lord Treasurer and all do confess it; which, while I mind my
business, is my own case in this office of the Navy, and I hope shall
be more, if God give me life and health. Thence by agreement to Sir J.
Minnes’s lodgings, where I found my Lord Bruncker, and so by water to
the ferry, and there took Sir W. Batten’s coach that was sent for us,
and to Sir W. Batten’s, where very merry, good cheer, and up and down
the garden with great content to me, and, after dinner, beat Captain
Cocke at billiards, won about 8s. of him and my Lord Bruncker. So in
the evening after, much pleasure back again and I by water to Woolwich,
where supped with my wife, and then to bed betimes, because of rising
to-morrow at four of the clock in order to the going out with Sir G.
Carteret toward Cranborne to my Lord Hinchingbrooke in his way to Court.
This night I did present my wife with the dyamond ring, awhile since
given me by Mr. Dicke Vines’s brother, for helping him to be a purser,
valued at about L10, the first thing of that nature I did ever give her.
Great fears we have that the plague will be a great Bill this weeke.