15th. Up by 4 o’clock and walked to Greenwich, where called at Captain
Cocke’s and to his chamber, he being in bed, where something put my
last night’s dream into my head, which I think is the best that ever
was dreamt, which was that I had my Lady Castlemayne in my armes and was
admitted to use all the dalliance I desired with her, and then dreamt
that this could not be awake, but that it was only a dream; but that
since it was a dream, and that I took so much real pleasure in it, what
a happy thing it would be if when we are in our graves (as Shakespeere
resembles it) we could dream, and dream but such dreams as this, that
then we should not need to be so fearful of death, as we are this plague
time. Here I hear that news is brought Sir G. Carteret that my Lord
Hinchingbrooke is not well, and so cannot meet us at Cranborne to-night.
So I to Sir G. Carteret’s; and there was sorry with him for our
disappointment. So we have put off our meeting there till Saturday next.
Here I staid talking with Sir G. Carteret, he being mighty free with me
in his business, and among other things hath ordered Rider and Cutler to
put into my hands copper to the value of L5,000 (which Sir G. Carteret’s
share it seems come to in it), which is to raise part of the money he is
to layout for a purchase for my Lady Jemimah. Thence he and I to Sir
J. Minnes’s by invitation, where Sir W. Batten and my Lady, and my Lord
Bruncker, and all of us dined upon a venison pasty and other good meat,
but nothing well dressed. But my pleasure lay in getting some bills
signed by Sir G. Carteret, and promise of present payment from Mr. Fenn,
which do rejoice my heart, it being one of the heaviest things I had
upon me, that so much of the little I have should lie (viz. near L1000)
in the King’s hands. Here very merry and (Sir G. Carteret being gone
presently after dinner) to Captain Cocke’s, and there merry, and so
broke up and I by water to the Duke of Albemarle, with whom I spoke a
great deale in private, they being designed to send a fleete of ships
privately to the Streights. No news yet from our fleete, which is much
wondered at, but the Duke says for certain guns have been heard to the
northward very much. It was dark before I could get home, and so land
at Church-yard stairs, where, to my great trouble, I met a dead corps
of the plague, in the narrow ally just bringing down a little pair of
stairs. But I thank God I was not much disturbed at it. However, I shall
beware of being late abroad again.