14th. Up, and betimes to Mr. Povy, being desirous to have an end of my
trouble of mind touching my Tangier business, whether he hath any desire
of accepting what my Lord Ashly offered, of his becoming Treasurer
again; and there I did, with a seeming most generous spirit, offer him
to take it back again upon his owne terms; but he did answer to me
that he would not above all things in the world, at which I was for the
present satisfied; but, going away thence and speaking with Creed, he
puts me in doubt that the very nature of the thing will require that he
be put in again; and did give me the reasons of the auditors, which, I
confess, are so plain, that I know not how to withstand them. But he
did give me most ingenious advice what to do in it, and anon, my Lord
Barkeley and some of the Commissioners coming together, though not in
a meeting, I did procure that they should order Povy’s payment of his
remain of accounts to me; which order if it do pass will put a good stop
to the fastening of the thing upon me. At noon Creed and I to a cook’s
shop at Charing Cross, and there dined and had much discourse, and his
very good upon my business, and upon other things, among the rest upon
Will Howe’s dissembling with us, we discovering one to another his
carriage to us, present and absent, being a very false fellow. Thence to
White Hall again, and there spent the afternoon, and then home to fetch
a letter for the Council, and so back to White Hall, where walked an
hour with Mr. Wren, of my Lord Chancellor’s, and Mr. Ager, and then to
Unthanke’s and called my wife, and with her through the city to Mile-End
Greene, and eat some creame and cakes and so back home, and I a little
at the office, and so home to supper and to bed. This morning I was
saluted with newes that the fleetes, ours and the Dutch, were engaged,
and that the guns were heard at Walthamstow to play all yesterday, and
that Captain Teddiman’s legs were shot off in the Royall Katherine.
But before night I hear the contrary, both by letters of my owne and
messengers thence, that they were all well of our side and no enemy
appears yet, and that the Royall Katherine is come to the fleete, and
likely to prove as good a ship as any the King hath, of which I am
heartily glad, both for Christopher Pett’s sake and Captain Teddiman
that is in her.