6th. Up, and having sent for Mr. Gawden he come to me, and he and I
largely discoursed the business of his Victualling, in order to the
adding of partners to him or other ways of altering it, wherein I find
him ready to do anything the King would have him do. So he and I took
his coach and to Lambeth and to the Duke of Albemarle about it, and so
back again, where he left me. In our way discoursing of the business
and contracting a great friendship with him, and I find he is a man most
worthy to be made a friend, being very honest and gratefull, and in the
freedom of our discourse he did tell me his opinion and knowledge of Sir
W. Pen to be, what I know him to be, as false a man as ever was born,
for so, it seems, he hath been to him. He did also tell me, discoursing
how things are governed as to the King’s treasure, that, having occasion
for money in the country, he did offer Alderman Maynell to pay him down
money here, to be paid by the Receiver in some county in the country,
upon whom Maynell had assignments, in whose hands the money also lay
ready. But Maynell refused it, saying that he could have his money when
he would, and had rather it should lie where it do than receive it here
in towne this sickly time, where he hath no occasion for it. But now
the evil is that he hath lent this money upon tallys which are become
payable, but he finds that nobody looks after it, how long the money is
unpaid, and whether it lies dead in the Receiver’s hands or no, so the
King he pays Maynell 10 per cent. while the money lies in his Receiver’s
hands to no purpose but the benefit of the Receiver. I to dinner to the
King’s Head with Mr. Woolly, who is come to instruct me in the business
of my goods, but gives me not so good comfort as I thought I should have
had. But, however, it will be well worth my time though not above 2 or
L300. He gone I to my office, where very busy drawing up a letter by
way of discourse to the Duke of Albemarle about my conception how the
business of the Victualling should be ordered, wherein I have taken
great pains, and I think have hitt the right if they will but follow it.
At this very late and so home to our lodgings to bed.