9th. Called up betimes by my Lord Bruncker, who is come to towne from
his long water worke at Erith last night, to go with him to the Duke of
Albemarle, which by his coach I did. Our discourse upon the ill posture
of the times through lacke of money. At the Duke’s did some business,
and I believe he was not pleased to see all the Duke’s discourse and
applications to me and everybody else. Discoursed also with Sir G.
Carteret about office business, but no money in view. Here my Lord and
I staid and dined, the Vice-Chamberlain taking his leave. At table the
Duchesse, a damned ill-looked woman, complaining of her Lord’s going
to sea the next year, said these cursed words: “If my Lord had been a
coward he had gone to sea no more: it may be then he might have been
excused, and made an Embassador” (meaning my Lord Sandwich).

     [When Lord Sandwich was away a new commander had to be chosen, and
     rank and long service pointed out Prince Rupert for the office, it
     having been decided that the heir presumptive should be kept at
     home.  It was thought, however, that the same confidence could not
     be placed in the prince’s discretion as in his courage, and
     therefore the Duke of Albemarle was induced to take a joint command
     with him, “and so make one admiral of two persons” (see Lister’s
     “Life of Clarendon,” vol. ii., pp. 360,361).]

This made me mad, and I believed she perceived my countenance change,
and blushed herself very much. I was in hopes others had not minded it,
but my Lord Bruncker, after we were come away, took notice of the words
to me with displeasure. Thence after dinner away by water, calling and
taking leave of Sir G. Carteret, whom we found going through at White
Hall, and so over to Lambeth and took coach and home, and so to the
office, where late writing letters, and then home to Mr. Hill, and sang,
among other things, my song of “Beauty retire,” which he likes, only
excepts against two notes in the base, but likes the whole very well. So
late to bed.