13th. Lay long, and this morning comes Sir Jer. Smith

     [Captain Jeremiah Smith (or Smyth), knighted June, 1665; Admiral of
     the Blue in 1666.  He succeeded Sir William Penn as Comptroller of
     the Victualling Accounts in 1669, and held the office until 1675.]

to see me in his way to Court, and a good man he is, and one that I
must keep fair with, and will, it being I perceive my interest to have
kindnesse with the Commanders. So to the office, and there very busy
till about noon comes Sir W. Warren, and he goes and gets a bit of meat
ready at the King’s Head for us, and I by and by thither, and we dined
together, and I am not pleased with him about a little business of
Tangier that I put to him to do for me, but however, the hurt is not
much, and his other matters of profit to me continue very likely to be
good. Here we spent till 2 o’clock, and so I set him on shore, and I by
water to the Duke of Albemarle, where I find him with Lord Craven and
Lieutenant of the Tower about him; among other things, talking of ships
to get of the King to fetch coles for the poore of the city, which is a
good worke. But, Lord! to hear the silly talke between these three great
people! Yet I have no reason to find fault, the Duke and Lord Craven
being my very great friends. Here did the business I come about, and so
back home by water, and there Cocke comes to me and tells me that he is
come to an understanding with Fisher, and that he must give him L100,
and that he shall have his goods in possession to-morrow, they being all
weighed to-day, which pleases me very well. This day the Duke tells me
that there is no news heard of the Dutch, what they do or where they
are, but believes that they are all gone home, for none of our spyes can
give us any tideings of them. Cocke is fain to keep these people, Fisher
and his fellow, company night and day to keep them friends almost and
great troubles withal. My head is full of settling the victualling
business also, that I may make some profit out of it, which I hope
justly to do to the King’s advantage. To-night come Sir J. Bankes to me
upon my letter to discourse it with him, and he did give me the advice
I have taken almost as fully as if I had been directed by him what to
write. The business also of my Tangier accounts to be sent to Court is
upon my hands in great haste; besides, all my owne proper accounts
are in great disorder, having been neglected now above a month, which
grieves me, but it could not be settled sooner. These together and the
feare of the sicknesse and providing for my family do fill my head very
full, besides the infinite business of the office, and nobody here to
look after it but myself. So late from my office to my lodgings, and to
bed.