27th. Up, and saw and admired my wife’s picture of our Saviour,

     [This picture by Mrs. Pepys may have given trouble when Pepys was
     unjustifiably attacked for having Popish pictures in his house.]

now finished, which is very pretty. So by water to Greenwich, where with
Creed and Lord Rutherford, and there my Lord told me that he would
give me L100 for my pains, which pleased me well, though Creed, like
a cunning rogue, hath got a promise of half of it from me. We to the
King’s Head, the great musique house, the first time I was ever there,
and had a good breakfast, and thence parted, I being much troubled to
hear from Creed, that he was told at Salsbury that I am come to be a
great swearer and drinker, though I know the contrary; but, Lord! to see
how my late little drinking of wine is taken notice of by envious men
to my disadvantage. I thence to Captain Cocke’s, [and] (he not yet come
from town) to Mr. Evelyn’s, where much company; and thence in his
coach with him to the Duke of Albemarle by Lambeth, who was in a mighty
pleasant humour; there the Duke tells us that the Dutch do stay abroad,
and our fleet must go out again, or to be ready to do so. Here we got
several things ordered as we desired for the relief of the prisoners,
and sick and wounded men. Here I saw this week’s Bill of Mortality,
wherein, blessed be God! there is above 1800 decrease, being the first
considerable decrease we have had. Back again the same way and had
most excellent discourse of Mr. Evelyn touching all manner of learning;
wherein I find him a very fine gentleman, and particularly of paynting,
in which he tells me the beautifull Mrs. Middleton is rare, and his
own wife do brave things. He brought me to the office, whither comes
unexpectedly Captain Cocke, who hath brought one parcel of our goods by
waggons, and at first resolved to have lodged them at our office; but
then the thoughts of its being the King’s house altered our resolution,
and so put them at his friend’s, Mr. Glanvill’s, and there they are
safe. Would the rest of them were so too! In discourse, we come to
mention my profit, and he offers me L500 clear, and I demand L600 for
my certain profit. We part to-night, and I lie there at Mr. Glanvill’s
house, there being none there but a maydeservant and a young man; being
in some pain, partly from not knowing what to do in this business,
having a mind to be at a certainty in my profit, and partly through his
having Jacke sicke still, and his blackemore now also fallen sicke. So
he being gone, I to bed.