9th (Lord’s day). Very pleasant with her and among my people, while she
made her ready, and, about 10 o’clock, by water to Sir G. Carteret, and
there find my Lady [Sandwich] in her chamber, not very well, but looks
the worst almost that ever I did see her in my life. It seems her
drinking of the water at Tunbridge did almost kill her before she could
with most violent physique get it out of her body again. We are received
with most extraordinary kindnesse by my Lady Carteret and her children,
and dined most nobly. Sir G. Carteret went to Court this morning. After
dinner I took occasion to have much discourse with Mr. Ph. Carteret, and
find him a very modest man; and I think verily of mighty good nature,
and pretty understanding. He did give me a good account of the fight
with the Dutch. My Lady Sandwich dined in her chamber. About three
o’clock I, leaving my wife there, took boat and home, and there shifted
myself into my black silke suit, and having promised Harman yesterday,
I to his house, which I find very mean, and mean company. His wife very
ill; I could not see her. Here I, with her father and Kate Joyce, who
was also very ill, were godfathers and godmother to his boy, and was
christened Will. Mr. Meriton christened him. The most observable thing I
found there to my content, was to hear him and his clerk tell me that in
this parish of Michell’s, Cornhill, one of the middlemost parishes and
a great one of the towne, there hath, notwithstanding this sickliness,
been buried of any disease, man, woman, or child, not one for thirteen
months last past; which [is] very strange. And the like in a good degree
in most other parishes, I hear, saving only of the plague in them, but
in this neither the plague nor any other disease. So back again home and
reshifted myself, and so down to my Lady Carteret’s, where mighty merry
and great pleasantnesse between my Lady Sandwich and the young ladies
and me, and all of us mighty merry, there never having been in the world
sure a greater business of general content than this match proposed
between Mr. Carteret and my Lady Jemimah. But withal it is mighty pretty
to think how my poor Lady Sandwich, between her and me, is doubtfull
whether her daughter will like of it or no, and how troubled she is for
fear of it, which I do not fear at all, and desire her not to do it, but
her fear is the most discreet and pretty that ever I did see. Late here,
and then my wife and I, with most hearty kindnesse from my Lady Carteret
by boat to Woolwich, come thither about 12 at night, and so to bed.