11th. And so all night down by water, a most pleasant passage, and come
thither by two o’clock, and so walked from the Old Swan home, and there
to bed to my Will, being very weary, and he lodging at my desire in
my house. At 6 o’clock up and to Westminster (where and all the towne
besides, I hear, the plague encreases), and, it being too soon to go to
the Duke of Albemarle, I to the Harp and Ball, and there made a bargain
with Mary to go forth with me in the afternoon, which she with much ado
consented to. So I to the Duke of Albemarle’s, and there with much ado
did get his consent in part to my having the money promised for Tangier,
and the other part did not concur. So being displeased with this, I back
to the office and there sat alone a while doing business, and then by
a solemn invitation to the Trinity House, where a great dinner and
company, Captain Dobbin’s feast for Elder Brother. But I broke up before
the dinner half over and by water to the Harp and Ball, and thence had
Mary meet me at the New Exchange, and there took coach and I with
great pleasure took the ayre to Highgate, and thence to Hampstead, much
pleased with her company, pretty and innocent, and had what pleasure
almost I would with her, and so at night, weary and sweaty, it being
very hot beyond bearing, we back again, and I set her down in St.
Martin’s Lane, and so I to the evening ‘Change, and there hear all the
towne full that Ostend is delivered to us, and that Alderman Backewell

     [Among the State Papers is a letter from the king to the Lord
     General (dated August 8th, 1665): “Alderman Backwell being in great
     straits for the second payment he has to make for the service in
     Flanders, as much tin is to be transmitted to him as will raise the
     sum.  Has authorized him and Sir George Carteret to treat with the
     tin farmers for 500 tons of tin to be speedily transported under
     good convoy; but if, on consulting with Alderman Backwell, this plan
     of the tin seems insufficient, then without further difficulty he is
     to dispose for that purpose of the L10,000 assigned for pay of the
     Guards, not doubting that before that comes due, other ways will be
     found for supplying it; the payment in Flanders is of such
     importance that some means must be found of providing for it”
      (“Calendar,” Domestic, 1664-65, pp. 508, 509)]

did go with L50,000 to that purpose. But the truth of it I do not know,
but something I believe there is extraordinary in his going. So to the
office, where I did what I could as to letters, and so away to bed,
shifting myself, and taking some Venice treakle, feeling myself out of
order, and thence to bed to sleep.