19th. Up by five o’clock, and by water to White Hall; and there took
coach, and with Mr. Moore to Chelsy; where, after all my fears what
doubts and difficulties my Lord Privy Seale would make at my Tangier
Privy Seale, he did pass it at first reading, without my speaking with
him. And then called me in, and was very civil to me. I passed my time
in contemplating (before I was called in) the picture of my Lord’s son’s
lady, a most beautiful woman, and most like to Mrs. Butler. Thence very
much joyed to London back again, and found out Mr. Povy; told him this;
and then went and left my Privy Seale at my Lord Treasurer’s; and so
to the ‘Change, and thence to Trinity-House; where a great dinner of
Captain Crisp, who is made an Elder Brother. And so, being very pleasant
at dinner, away home, Creed with me; and there met Povy; and we to
Gresham College, where we saw some experiments upon a hen, a dogg, and a
cat, of the Florence poyson.

     [“Sir Robert Moray presented the Society from the King with a phial
     of Florentine poison sent for by his Majesty from Florence, on
     purpose to have those experiments related of the efficacy thereof,
     tried by the Society.”  The poison had little effect upon the kitten
     (Birch’s “History;” vol. ii., p. 31).]

The first it made for a time drunk, but it come to itself again quickly;
the second it made vomitt mightily, but no other hurt. The third I did
not stay to see the effect of it, being taken out by Povy. He and I
walked below together, he giving me most exceeding discouragements in
the getting of money (whether by design or no I know not, for I am now
come to think him a most cunning fellow in most things he do, but his
accounts), and made it plain to me that money will be hard to get, and
that it is to be feared Backewell hath a design in it to get the thing
forced upon himself. This put me into a cruel melancholy to think I may
lose what I have had so near my hand; but yet something may be hoped for
which to-morrow will shew. He gone, Creed and I together a great while
consulting what to do in this case, and after all I left him to do what
he thought fit in his discourse to-morrow with my Lord Ashly. So home,
and in my way met with Mr. Warren, from whom my hopes I fear will fail
of what I hoped for, by my getting him a protection. But all these
troubles will if not be over, yet we shall see the worst of there in a
day or two. So to my office, and thence to supper, and my head akeing,
betimes, that is by 10 or 11 o’clock, to bed.