20th. Up and to Westminster, where having spoke with Sir Ph. Warwicke,
I to Jervas, and there I find them all in great disorder about Jane, her
mistress telling me secretly that she was sworn not to reveal anything,
but she was undone. At last for all her oath she told me that she had
made herself sure to a fellow that comes to their house that can only
fiddle for his living, and did keep him company, and had plainly told
her that she was sure to him never to leave him for any body else. Now
they were this day contriving to get her presently to marry one Hayes
that was there, and I did seem to persuade her to it. And at last got
them to suffer me to advise privately, and by that means had her company
and think I shall meet her next Sunday, but I do really doubt she will
be undone in marrying this fellow. But I did give her my advice, and so
let her do her pleasure, so I have now and then her company. Thence to
the Swan at noon, and there sent for a bit of meat and dined, and had my
baiser of the fille of the house there, but nothing plus. So took coach
and to my Lady Sandwich’s, and so to my bookseller’s, and there took
home Hooke’s book of microscopy, a most excellent piece, and of which
I am very proud. So home, and by and by again abroad with my wife
about several businesses, and met at the New Exchange, and there to our
trouble found our pretty Doll is gone away to live they say with her
father in the country, but I doubt something worse. So homeward, in
my way buying a hare and taking it home, which arose upon my discourse
to-day with Mr. Batten, in Westminster Hall, who showed me my mistake
that my hare’s foote hath not the joynt to it; and assures me he never
had his cholique since he carried it about him: and it is a strange
thing how fancy works, for I no sooner almost handled his foote but my
belly began to be loose and to break wind, and whereas I was in some
pain yesterday and t’other day and in fear of more to-day, I became very
well, and so continue. At home to my office a while, and so to supper,
read, and to cards, and to bed.