14th. Up, and walked to Greenwich, and there fitted myself in several
businesses to go to London, where I have not been now a pretty while.
But before I went from the office newes is brought by word of mouth that
letters are now just now brought from the fleete of our taking a great
many more of the Dutch fleete, in which I did never more plainly see my
command of my temper in my not admitting myself to receive any kind of
joy from it till I had heard the certainty of it, and therefore went by
water directly to the Duke of Albemarle, where I find a letter of the
Lath from Solebay, from my Lord Sandwich, of the fleete’s meeting with
about eighteen more of the Dutch fleete, and his taking of most of them;
and the messenger says, they had taken three after the letter was wrote
and sealed; which being twenty-one, and the fourteen took the other day,
is forty-five sail; some of which are good, and others rich ships,
which is so great a cause of joy in us all that my Lord and everybody
is highly joyed thereat. And having taken a copy of my Lord’s letter, I
away back again to the Beare at the Bridge foot, being full of wind and
out of order, and there called for a biscuit and a piece of cheese and
gill of sacke, being forced to walk over the Bridge, toward the ‘Change,
and the plague being all thereabouts. Here my news was highly welcome,
and I did wonder to see the ‘Change so full, I believe 200 people; but
not a man or merchant of any fashion, but plain men all. And Lord! to
see how I did endeavour all I could to talk with as few as I could,
there being now no observation of shutting up of houses infected, that
to be sure we do converse and meet with people that have the plague upon
them. I to Sir Robert Viner’s, where my main business was about settling
the business of Debusty’s L5000 tallys, which I did for the present to
enable me to have some money, and so home, buying some things for
my wife in the way. So home, and put up several things to carry to
Woolwich, and upon serious thoughts I am advised by W. Griffin to let
my money and plate rest there, as being as safe as any place, nobody
imagining that people would leave money in their houses now, when all
their families are gone. So for the present that being my opinion, I did
leave them there still. But, Lord! to see the trouble that it puts a man
to, to keep safe what with pain a man hath been getting together, and
there is good reason for it. Down to the office, and there wrote letters
to and again about this good newes of our victory, and so by water home
late. Where, when I come home I spent some thoughts upon the occurrences
of this day, giving matter for as much content on one hand and
melancholy on another, as any day in all my life. For the first; the
finding of my money and plate, and all safe at London, and speeding in
my business of money this day. The hearing of this good news to such
excess, after so great a despair of my Lord’s doing anything this
year; adding to that, the decrease of 500 and more, which is the first
decrease we have yet had in the sickness since it begun: and great
hopes that the next week it will be greater. Then, on the other side, my
finding that though the Bill in general is abated, yet the City within
the walls is encreased, and likely to continue so, and is close to our
house there. My meeting dead corpses of the plague, carried to be buried
close to me at noon-day through the City in Fanchurch-street. To see
a person sick of the sores, carried close by me by Gracechurch in
a hackney-coach. My finding the Angell tavern, at the lower end
of Tower-hill, shut up, and more than that, the alehouse at the
Tower-stairs, and more than that, the person was then dying of the
plague when I was last there, a little while ago, at night, to write
a short letter there, and I overheard the mistresse of the house sadly
saying to her husband somebody was very ill, but did not think it was of
the plague. To hear that poor Payne, my waiter, hath buried a child, and
is dying himself. To hear that a labourer I sent but the other day to
Dagenhams, to know how they did there, is dead of the plague; and that
one of my own watermen, that carried me daily, fell sick as soon as he
had landed me on Friday morning last, when I had been all night upon the
water (and I believe he did get his infection that day at Brainford),
and is now dead of the plague. To hear that Captain Lambert and Cuttle
are killed in the taking these ships; and that Mr. Sidney Montague is
sick of a desperate fever at my Lady Carteret’s, at Scott’s-hall. To
hear that Mr. Lewes hath another daughter sick. And, lastly, that both
my servants, W. Hewer and Tom Edwards, have lost their fathers, both in
St. Sepulchre’s parish, of the plague this week, do put me into great
apprehensions of melancholy, and with good reason. But I put off the
thoughts of sadness as much as I can, and the rather to keep my wife in
good heart and family also. After supper (having eat nothing all this
day) upon a fine tench of Mr. Shelden’s taking, we to bed.