31st. Up, and to the office, Captain Ferrers going back betimes to my
Lord. I to the office, where Sir W. Batten met me, and did tell me
that Captain Cocke’s black was dead of the plague, which I had heard of
before, but took no notice. By and by Captain Cocke come to the office,
and Sir W. Batten and I did send to him that he would either forbear the
office, or forbear going to his owne office. However, meeting yesterday
the Searchers with their rods in their hands coming from Captain Cocke’s
house, I did overhear them say that the fellow did not die of the
plague, but he had I know been ill a good while, and I am told that his
boy Jack is also ill. At noon home to dinner, and then to the office
again, leaving Mr. Hill if he can to get Mrs. Coleman at night. About
nine at night I come home, and there find Mrs. Pierce come and little
Fran. Tooker, and Mr. Hill, and other people, a great many dancing, and
anon comes Mrs. Coleman with her husband and Laneare. The dancing ended
and to sing, which Mrs. Coleman do very finely, though her voice is
decayed as to strength but mighty sweet though soft, and a pleasant
jolly woman, and in mighty good humour was to-night. Among other things
Laneare did, at the request of Mr. Hill, bring two or three the finest
prints for my wife to see that ever I did see in all my life. But for
singing, among other things, we got Mrs. Coleman to sing part of the
Opera, though she won’t owne that ever she did get any of it without
book in order to the stage; but, above all, her counterfeiting of
Captain Cooke’s part, in his reproaching his man with cowardice, “Base
slave,” &c., she do it most excellently. At it till past midnight, and
then broke up and to bed. Hill and I together again, and being very
sleepy we had little discourse as we had the other night. Thus we end
the month merrily; and the more for that, after some fears that the
plague would have increased again this week, I hear for certain that
there is above 400 [less], the whole number being 1,388, and of them
of the plague, 1,031. Want of money in the Navy puts everything out of
order. Men grow mutinous; and nobody here to mind the business of the
Navy but myself. At least Sir W. Batten for the few days he has been
here do nothing. I in great hopes of my place of Surveyor-Generall of
the Victualling, which will bring me L300 per annum.