12th. After doing what business I could in the morning, it being a
solemn fast-day

     [“A form of Common Prayer; together with an order for fasting for
     the averting of God’s heavy visitation upon many places of this
     realm.  The fast to be observed within the cities of London and
     Westminster and places adjacent, on Wednesday the twelfth of this
     instant July, and both there and in all parts of this realm on the
     first Wednesday in every month during the visitation” (“Calendar of
     State Papers,” Domestic, 1664-65, p. 466).]

for the plague growing upon us, I took boat and down to Deptford,
where I stood with great pleasure an houre or two by my Lady Sandwich’s
bedside, talking to her (she lying prettily in bed) of my Lady Jemimah’s
being from my Lady Pickering’s when our letters come to that place; she
being at my Lord Montagu’s, at Boughton. The truth is, I had received
letters of it two days ago, but had dropped them, and was in a very
extraordinary straite what to do for them, or what account to give my
Lady, but sent to every place; I sent to Moreclacke, where I had been
the night before, and there they were found, which with mighty joy come
safe to me; but all ending with satisfaction to my Lady and me, though I
find my Lady Carteret not much pleased with this delay, and principally
because of the plague, which renders it unsafe to stay long at Deptford.
I eat a bit (my Lady Carteret being the most kind lady in the world),
and so took boat, and a fresh boat at the Tower, and so up the river,
against tide all the way, I having lost it by staying prating to and
with my Lady, and, from before one, made it seven ere we got to Hampton
Court; and when I come there all business was over, saving my finding
Mr. Coventry at his chamber, and with him a good while about several
businesses at his chamber, and so took leave, and away to my boat, and
all night upon the water, staying a while with Nan at Moreclacke, very
much pleased and merry with her, and so on homeward, and come home by
two o’clock, shooting the bridge at that time of night, and so to bed,
where I find Will is not, he staying at Woolwich to come with my wife
to dinner tomorrow to my Lady Carteret’s. Heard Mr. Williamson repeat at
Hampton Court to-day how the King of France hath lately set out a most
high arrest against the Pope, which is reckoned very lofty and high.

     [Arret.  The rupture between Alexander VII. and Louis XIV. was
     healed in 1664, by the treaty signed at Pisa, on February 12th.  On