12th. Up, and to White Hall to a Committee of Tangier, where, contrary
to all expectation, my Lord Ashly, being vexed with Povy’s accounts, did
propose it as necessary that Povy should be still continued Treasurer of
Tangier till he had made up his accounts; and with such arguments as,
I confess, I was not prepared to answer, but by putting off of the
discourse, and so, I think, brought it right again; but it troubled
me so all the day after, and night too, that I was not quiet, though I
think it doubtfull whether I shall be much the worse for it or no, if
it should come to be so. Dined at home and thence to White Hall again
(where I lose most of my time now-a-days to my great trouble, charge,
and loss of time and benefit), and there, after the Council rose, Sir
G. Carteret, my Lord Brunkard, Sir Thomas Harvy, and myself, down to
my Lord Treasurer’s chamber to him and the Chancellor, and the Duke of
Albemarle; and there I did give them a large account of the charge of
the Navy, and want of money. But strange to see how they held up their
hands crying, “What shall we do?” Says my Lord Treasurer, “Why, what
means all this, Mr. Pepys? This is true, you say; but what would you
have me to do? I have given all I can for my life. Why will not people
lend their money? Why will they not trust the King as well as Oliver?
Why do our prizes come to nothing, that yielded so much heretofore?” And
this was all we could get, and went away without other answer, which
is one of the saddest things that, at such a time as this, with the
greatest action on foot that ever was in England, nothing should be
minded, but let things go on of themselves do as well as they can. So
home, vexed, and going to my Lady Batten’s, there found a great many
women with her, in her chamber merry, my Lady Pen and her daughter,
among others; where my Lady Pen flung me down upon the bed, and herself
and others, one after another, upon me, and very merry we were, and
thence I home and called my wife with my Lady Pen to supper, and very
merry as I could be, being vexed as I was. So home to bed.