4th. Up at five o’clock, and by six walked out alone, with my Lady
Slanning, to the Docke Yard, where walked up and down, and so to
Mr. Pett’s, who led us into his garden, and there the lady, the best
humoured woman in the world, and a devout woman (I having spied her on
her knees half an houre this morning in her chamber), clambered up to
the top of the banquetting-house to gather nuts, and mighty merry, and
so walked back again through the new rope house, which is very usefull;
and so to the Hill-house to breakfast and mighty merry. Then they took
coach, and Sir G. Carteret kissed me himself heartily, and my Lady
several times, with great kindnesse, and then the young ladies, and so
with much joy, bade “God be with you!” and an end I think it will be to
my mirthe for a great while, it having been the passage of my whole life
the most pleasing for the time, considering the quality and nature of
the business, and my noble usage in the doing of it, and very many fine
journys, entertainments and great company. I returned into the house for
a while to do business there with Commissioner Pett, and there with the
officers of the Chest, where I saw more of Sir W. Batten’s business than
ever I did before, for whereas he did own once under his hand to them
that he was accountable for L2200, of which he had yet paid but L1600,
he writes them a letter lately that he hath but about L50 left that is
due to the Chest, but I will do something in it and that speedily.
That being done I took horse, and Mr. Barrow with me bore me company to
Gravesend, discoursing of his business, wherein I vexed him, and he me,
I seeing his frowardness, but yet that he is in my conscience a very
honest man, and some good things he told me, which I shall remember
to the King’s advantage. There I took boat alone, and, the tide being
against me, landed at Blackwall and walked to Wapping, Captain Bowd whom
I met with talking with me all the way, who is a sober man. So home, and
found all things well, and letters from Dover that my Lord Hinchingbroke
is arrived at Dover, and would be at Scott’s hall this night, where the
whole company will meet. I wish myself with them. After writing a few
letters I took boat and down to Woolwich very late, and there found my
wife and her woman upon the key hearing a fellow in a barge, that lay
by, fiddle. So I to them and in, very merry, and to bed, I sleepy and
weary.