17th. Up and to my office, and then with Sir W. Batten to St. James’s,
where many come to take leave, as was expected, of the Duke, but he do
not go till Monday. This night my Lady Wood died of the small-pox, and
is much lamented among the great persons for a good-natured woman and a
good wife, but for all that it was ever believed she was as others are.
The Duke did give us some commands, and so broke up, not taking leave
of him. But the best piece of newes is, that instead of a great many
troublesome Lords, the whole business is to be left with the Duke of
Albemarle to act as Admirall in his stead; which is a thing that do
cheer my heart. For the other would have vexed us with attendance, and
never done the business. Thence to the Committee of Tangier, where the
Duke a little, and then left us and we staid. A very great Committee,
the Lords Albemarle, Sandwich, Barkely, Fitzharding, Peterborough,
Ashley, Sir Thos. Ingram, Sir G. Carteret and others. The whole business
was the stating of Povy’s accounts, of whom to say no more, never could
man say worse himself nor have worse said of him than was by the company
to his face; I mean, as to his folly and very reflecting words to his
honesty. Broke up without anything but trouble and shame, only I got
my businesses done to the signing of two bills for the Contractors and
Captain Taylor, and so come away well pleased, and home, taking up my
wife at the ‘Change, to dinner. After dinner out again bringing my wife
to her father’s again at Charing Cross, and I to the Committee again,
where a new meeting of trouble about Povy, who still makes his business
worse and worse, and broke up with the most open shame again to him,
and high words to him of disgrace that they would not trust him with any
more money till he had given an account of this. So broke up. Then
he took occasion to desire me to step aside, and he and I by water to
London together. In the way, of his owne accord, he proposed to me
that he would surrender his place of Treasurer’ to me to have half the
profit. The thing is new to me; but the more I think the more I like it,
and do put him upon getting it done by the Duke. Whether it takes or no
I care not, but I think at present it may have some convenience in it.
Home, and there find my wife come home and gone to bed, of a cold got
yesterday by water. At the office Bellamy come to me again, and I am in
hopes something may be got by his business. So late home to supper and
bed.