24th (Midsummer-day). Up very betimes, by six, and at Dr. Clerke’s at
Westminster by 7 of the clock, having over night by a note acquainted
him with my intention of coming, and there I, in the best manner I
could, broke my errand about a match between Sir G. Carteret’s eldest
son and my Lord Sandwich’s eldest daughter, which he (as I knew he
would) took with great content: and we both agreed that my Lord and he,
being both men relating to the sea, under a kind aspect of His Majesty,
already good friends, and both virtuous and good familys, their allyance
might be of good use to us; and he did undertake to find out Sir George
this morning, and put the business in execution. So being both well
pleased with the proposition, I saw his niece there and made her sing me
two or three songs very prettily, and so home to the office, where to
my great trouble I found Mr. Coventry and the board met before I come.
I excused my late coming by having been on the River about office
business. So to business all the morning. At noon Captain Ferrers and
Mr. Moore dined with me, the former of them the first time I saw him
since his corning from sea, who do give me the best conversation in
general, and as good an account of the particular service of the Prince
and my Lord of Sandwich in the late sea-fight that I could desire. After
dinner they parted. So I to White Hall, where I with Creed and Povy
attended my Lord Treasurer, and did prevail with him to let us have an
assignment for 15 or L20,000, which, I hope, will do our business
for Tangier. So to Dr. Clerke, and there found that he had broke the
business to Sir G. Carteret, and that he takes the thing mighty well.
Thence I to Sir G. Carteret at his chamber, and in the best manner I
could, and most obligingly, moved the business: he received it with
great respect and content, and thanks to me, and promised that he would
do what he could possibly for his son, to render him fit for my Lord’s
daughter, and shewed great kindness to me, and sense of my kindness to
him herein. Sir William Pen told me this day that Mr. Coventry is to be
sworn a Privy Counsellor, at which my soul is glad. So home and to my
letters by the post, and so home to supper and bed.