7 o’clock, then up and to the office upon Sir G. Carteret’s accounts
again, where very busy; thence abroad and to the ‘Change, no news of
certainty being yet come from the fleete. Thence to the Dolphin Taverne,
where Sir J. Minnes, Lord Brunkard, Sir Thomas Harvy, and myself dined,
upon Sir G. Carteret’s charge, and very merry we were, Sir Thomas Harvy
being a very drolle. Thence to the office, and meeting Creed away with
him to my Lord Treasurer’s, there thinking to have met the goldsmiths,
at White Hall, but did not, and so appointed another time for my Lord to
speak to them to advance us some money. Thence, it being the hottest day
that ever I felt in my life, and it is confessed so by all other people
the hottest they ever knew in England in the beginning of June, we to
the New Exchange, and there drunk whey, with much entreaty getting it
for our money, and [they] would not be entreated to let us have one
glasse more. So took water and to Fox-Hall, to the Spring garden, and
there walked an houre or two with great pleasure, saving our minds ill
at ease concerning the fleete and my Lord Sandwich, that we have no
newes of them, and ill reports run up and down of his being killed, but
without ground. Here staid pleasantly walking and spending but 6d. till
nine at night, and then by water to White Hall, and there I stopped
to hear news of the fleete, but none come, which is strange, and so by
water home, where, weary with walking and with the mighty heat of the
weather, and for my wife’s not coming home, I staying walking in the
garden till twelve at night, when it begun to lighten exceedingly,
through the greatness of the heat. Then despairing of her coming home,
I to bed. This day, much against my will, I did in Drury Lane see two
or three houses marked with a red cross upon the doors, and “Lord have
mercy upon us” writ there; which was a sad sight to me, being the first
of the kind that, to my remembrance, I ever saw. It put me into an ill
conception of myself and my smell, so that I was forced to buy some
roll-tobacco to smell to and chaw, which took away the apprehension.