6th. Up, and to my office, where busy all the morning and then to dinner
to Captain Cocke’s with Mr. Evelyn, where very merry, only vexed after
dinner to stay too long for our coach. At last, however, to Lambeth and
thence the Cockpitt, where we found Sir G. Carteret come, and in with
the Duke and the East India Company about settling the business of the
prizes, and they have gone through with it. Then they broke up, and Sir
G. Carteret come out, and thence through the garden to the water side
and by water I with him in his boat down with Captain Cocke to his house
at Greenwich, and while supper was getting ready Sir G. Carteret and
I did walk an houre in the garden before the house, talking of my Lord
Sandwich’s business; what enemies he hath, and how they have endeavoured
to bespatter him: and particularly about his leaving of 30 ships of
the enemy, when Pen would have gone, and my Lord called him back again:
which is most false. However, he says, it was purposed by some hot-heads
in the House of Commons, at the same time when they voted a present
to the Duke of Yorke, to have voted L10,000 to the Prince, and
half-a-crowne to my Lord of Sandwich; but nothing come of it.

     [The tide of popular indignation ran high against Lord Sandwich, and
     he was sent to Spain as ambassador to get him honourably out of the
     way (see post, December 6th).]

But, for all this, the King is most firme to my Lord, and so is my Lord
Chancellor, and my Lord Arlington. The Prince, in appearance, kind; the
Duke of Yorke silent, says no hurt; but admits others to say it in his
hearing. Sir W. Pen, the falsest rascal that ever was in the world; and
that this afternoon the Duke of Albemarle did tell him that Pen was
a very cowardly rogue, and one that hath brought all these rogueish
fanatick Captains into the fleete, and swears he should never go out
with the fleete again. That Sir W. Coventry is most kind to Pen still;
and says nothing nor do any thing openly to the prejudice of my Lord. He
agrees with me, that it is impossible for the King [to] set out a fleete
again the next year; and that he fears all will come to ruine, there
being no money in prospect but these prizes, which will bring, it may
be, L20,000, but that will signify nothing in the world for it. That
this late Act of Parliament for bringing the money into the Exchequer,
and making of it payable out there, intended as a prejudice to him and
will be his convenience hereafter and ruine the King’s business, and
so I fear it will and do wonder Sir W. Coventry would be led by Sir G.
Downing to persuade the King and Duke to have it so, before they had
thoroughly weighed all circumstances; that for my Lord, the King has
said to him lately that I was an excellent officer, and that my Lord
Chancellor do, he thinks, love and esteem of me as well as he do of any
man in England that he hath no more acquaintance with. So having done
and received from me the sad newes that we are like to have no money
here a great while, not even of the very prizes, I set up my rest

     [The phrase “set up my rest” is a metaphor from the once fashionable
     game of Primero, meaning, to stand upon the cards you have in your
     hand, in hopes they may prove better than those of your adversary.
     Hence, to make up your mind, to be determined (see Nares’s
     “Glossary”).]

in giving up the King’s service to be ruined and so in to supper, where
pretty merry, and after supper late to Mr. Glanville’s, and Sir G.
Carteret to bed. I also to bed, it being very late.