21st. Up between five and six o’clock; and by the time I was ready, my
Lord’s coach comes for me; and taking Will Hewer with me, who is all
in mourning for his father, who is lately dead of the plague, as my boy
Tom’s is also, I set out, and took about L100 with me to pay the fees
there, and so rode in some fear of robbing. When I come thither, I
find only Mr. Ward, who led me to Burgess’s bedside, and Spicer’s, who,
watching of the house, as it is their turns every night, did lie long in
bed to-day, and I find nothing at all done in my business, which vexed
me. But not seeing how to helpe it I did walk up and down with Mr. Ward
to see the house; and by and by Spicer and Mr. Falconbrige come to
me and he and I to a towne near by, Yowell, there drink and set up my
horses and also bespoke a dinner, and while that is dressing went with
Spicer and walked up and down the house and park; and a fine place it
hath heretofore been, and a fine prospect about the house. A great walk
of an elme and a walnutt set one after another in order. And all the
house on the outside filled with figures of stories, and good painting
of Rubens’ or Holben’s doing. And one great thing is, that most of the
house is covered, I mean the posts, and quarters in the walls; covered
with lead, and gilded. I walked into the ruined garden, and there found
a plain little girle, kinswoman of Mr. Falconbridge, to sing very finely
by the eare only, but a fine way of singing, and if I come ever to lacke
a girle again I shall think of getting her. Thence to the towne, and
there Spicer, Woodruffe, and W. Bowyer and I dined together and a
friend of Spicer’s; and a good dinner I had for them. Falconbrige dined
somewhere else, by appointment. Strange to see how young W. Bowyer looks
at 41 years; one would not take him for 24 or more, and is one of the
greatest wonders I ever did see. After dinner, about 4 of the clock we
broke up, and I took coach and home (in fear for the money I had with
me, but that this friend of Spicer’s, one of the Duke’s guard did ride
along the best part of the way with us). I got to my Lord Bruncker’s
before night, and there I sat and supped with him and his mistresse,
and Cocke whose boy is yet ill. Thence, after losing a crowne betting at
Tables--[Cribbage]--, we walked home, Cocke seeing me at my new lodging,
where I went to bed. All my worke this day in the coach going and coming
was to refresh myself in my musique scale, which I would fain have
perfecter than ever I had yet.