9th. Up and walked to Greenwich, and there we sat and dispatched a good
deal of business I had a mind to. At noon, by invitation, to my Lord
Bruncker’s, all of us, to dinner, where a good venison pasty, and mighty
merry. Here was Sir W. Doyly, lately come from Ipswich about the sicke
and wounded, and Mr. Evelyn and Captain Cocke. My wife also was sent for
by my Lord Bruncker, by Cocke, and was here. After dinner, my Lord and
his mistress would see her home again, it being a most cursed rainy
afternoon, having had none a great while before, and I, forced to go to
the office on foot through all the rain, was almost wet to my skin, and
spoiled my silke breeches almost. Rained all the afternoon and evening,
so as my letters being done, I was forced to get a bed at Captain
Cocke’s, where I find Sir W. Doyly, and he, and Evelyn at supper; and
I with them full of discourse of the neglect of our masters, the great
officers of State, about all business, and especially that of money:
having now some thousands prisoners, kept to no purpose at a great
charge, and no money provided almost for the doing of it. We fell to
talk largely of the want of some persons understanding to look after
businesses, but all goes to rack. “For,” says Captain Cocke, “my Lord
Treasurer, he minds his ease, and lets things go how they will: if he
can have his L8000 per annum, and a game at l’ombre,--[Spanish card
game]--he is well. My Lord Chancellor he minds getting of money and
nothing else; and my Lord Ashly will rob the Devil and the Alter, but he
will get money if it be to be got.” But that that put us into this great
melancholy, was newes brought to-day, which Captain Cocke reports as a
certain truth, that all the Dutch fleete, men-of-war and merchant East
India ships, are got every one in from Bergen the 3d of this month,
Sunday last; which will make us all ridiculous. The fleete come home
with shame to require a great deale of money, which is not to be had, to
discharge many men that must get the plague then or continue at greater
charge on shipboard, nothing done by them to encourage the Parliament to
give money, nor the Kingdom able to spare any money, if they would, at
this time of the plague, so that, as things look at present, the whole
state must come to ruine. Full of these melancholy thoughts, to bed;
where, though I lay the softest I ever did in my life, with a downe bed,
after the Danish manner, upon me, yet I slept very ill, chiefly through
the thoughts of my Lord Sandwich’s concernment in all this ill successe
at sea.