17th. Sailed all night, and got down to Quinbrough water, where all
the great ships are now come, and there on board my Lord, and was soon
received with great content. And after some little discourse, he and I
on board Sir W. Pen; and there held a council of Warr about many wants
of the fleete, but chiefly how to get slopps and victuals for the
fleete now going out to convoy our Hambro’ ships, that have been so
long detained for four or five months for want of convoy, which we did
accommodate one way or other, and so, after much chatt, Sir W. Pen did
give us a very good and neat dinner, and better, I think, than ever I
did see at his owne house at home in my life, and so was the other I
eat with him. After dinner much talke, and about other things, he and
I about his money for his prize goods, wherein I did give him a cool
answer, but so as we did not disagree in words much, and so let that
fall, and so followed my Lord Sandwich, who was gone a little before
me on board the Royall James. And there spent an houre, my Lord playing
upon the gittarr, which he now commends above all musique in the world,
because it is base enough for a single voice, and is so portable and
manageable without much trouble. That being done, I got my Lord to be
alone, and so I fell to acquaint him with W. Howe’s business, which
he had before heard a little of from Captain Cocke, but made no great
matter of it, but now he do, and resolves nothing less than to lay him
by the heels, and seize on all he hath, saying that for this yeare or
two he hath observed him so proud and conceited he could not endure
him. But though I was not at all displeased with it, yet I prayed him to
forbear doing anything therein till he heard from me again about it, and
I had made more enquiry into the truth of it, which he agreed to. Then
we fell to publique discourse, wherein was principally this: he cleared
it to me beyond all doubt that Coventry is his enemy, and has been long
so. So that I am over that, and my Lord told it me upon my proposal of a
friendship between them, which he says is impossible, and methinks that
my Lord’s displeasure about the report in print of the first fight was
not of his making, but I perceive my Lord cannot forget it, nor the
other think he can. I shewed him how advisable it were upon almost any
terms for him to get quite off the sea employment. He answers me again
that he agrees to it, but thinks the King will not let him go off: He
tells me he lacks now my Lord Orrery to solicit it for him, who is
very great with the King. As an infinite secret, my Lord tells me, the
factions are high between the King and the Duke, and all the Court are
in an uproare with their loose amours; the Duke of Yorke being in love
desperately with Mrs. Stewart. Nay, that the Duchesse herself is fallen
in love with her new Master of the Horse, one Harry Sidney, and another,
Harry Savill. So that God knows what will be the end of it. And that the
Duke is not so obsequious as he used to be, but very high of late; and
would be glad to be in the head of an army as Generall; and that it is
said that he do propose to go and command under the King of Spayne, in
Flanders. That his amours to Mrs. Stewart are told the King. So that all
is like to be nought among them. That he knows that the Duke of Yorke do
give leave to have him spoken slightly of in his owne hearing, and
doth not oppose it, and told me from what time he hath observed this
to begin. So that upon the whole my Lord do concur to wish with all his
heart that he could with any honour get from off the imployment. After
he had given thanks to me for my kind visit and good counsel, on which
he seems to set much by, I left him, and so away to my Bezan againe, and
there to read in a pretty French book, “La Nouvelle Allegorique,” upon
the strife between rhetorique and its enemies, very pleasant. So, after
supper, to sleepe, and sayled all night, and came to Erith before break
of day.