27th. Up, and being to go to wait on the Duke of Albemarle, who is to go
out of towne to Oxford to-morrow, and I being unwilling to go by
water, it being bitter cold, walked it with my landlady’s little boy
Christopher to Lambeth, it being a very fine walke and calling at half
the way and drank, and so to the Duke of Albemarle, who is visited
by every body against his going; and mighty kind to me: and upon my
desiring his grace to give me his kind word to the Duke of Yorke, if any
occasion there were of speaking of me, he told me he had reason to do
so; for there had been nothing done in the Navy without me. His going, I
hear, is upon putting the sea business into order, and, as some say, and
people of his owne family, that he is agog to go to sea himself the
next year. Here I met with a letter from Sir G. Carteret, who is come to
Cranborne, that he will be here this afternoon and desires me to be with
him. So the Duke would have me dine with him. So it being not dinner
time, I to the Swan, and there found Sarah all alone in the house....
So away to the Duke of Albemarle again, and there to dinner, he most
exceeding kind to me to the observation of all that are there. At dinner
comes Sir G. Carteret and dines with us. After dinner a great deal alone
with Sir G. Carteret, who tells me that my Lord hath received still
worse and worse usage from some base people about the Court. But the
King is very kind, and the Duke do not appear the contrary; and my Lord
Chancellor swore to him “by---I will not forsake my Lord of Sandwich.”
 Our next discourse is upon this Act for money, about which Sir G.
Carteret comes to see what money can be got upon it. But none can be
got, which pleases him the thoughts of, for, if the Exchequer should
succeede in this, his office would faile. But I am apt to think at this
time of hurry and plague and want of trade, no money will be got upon a
new way which few understand. We walked, Cocke and I, through the Parke
with him, and so we being to meet the Vice-Chamberlayne to-morrow at
Nonesuch, to treat with Sir Robert Long about the same business, I into
London, it being dark night, by a hackney coach; the first I have durst
to go in many a day, and with great pain now for fear. But it being
unsafe to go by water in the dark and frosty cold, and unable being
weary with my morning walke to go on foot, this was my only way. Few
people yet in the streets, nor shops open, here and there twenty in
a place almost; though not above five or sixe o’clock at night. So to
Viner’s, and there heard of Cocke, and found him at the Pope’s Head,
drinking with Temple. I to them, where the Goldsmiths do decry the
new Act, for money to be all brought into the Exchequer, and paid out
thence, saying they will not advance one farthing upon it; and indeed
it is their interest to say and do so. Thence Cocke and I to Sir
G. Smith’s, it being now night, and there up to his chamber and sat
talking, and I barbing--[shaving]--against to-morrow; and anon, at nine
at night, comes to us Sir G. Smith and the Lieutenant of the Tower, and
there they sat talking and drinking till past midnight, and mighty merry
we were, the Lieutenant of the Tower being in a mighty vein of singing,
and he hath a very good eare and strong voice, but no manner of skill.
Sir G. Smith shewed me his lady’s closett, which was very fine; and,
after being very merry, here I lay in a noble chamber, and mighty highly
treated, the first time I have lain in London a long time.