29th (Lord’s day). Up, and being ready set out with Captain Cocke in his
coach toward Erith, Mr. Deane riding along with us, where we dined and
were very merry. After dinner we fell to discourse about the Dutch,
Cocke undertaking to prove that they were able to wage warr with us
three years together, which, though it may be true, yet, not being
satisfied with his arguments, my Lord and I did oppose the strength of
his arguments, which brought us to a great heate, he being a conceited
man, but of no Logique in his head at all, which made my Lord and I
mirth. Anon we parted, and back again, we hardly having a word all the
way, he being so vexed at our not yielding to his persuasion. I was set
down at Woolwich towne end, and walked through the towne in the darke,
it being now night. But in the streete did overtake and almost run upon
two women crying and carrying a man’s coffin between them. I suppose the
husband of one of them, which, methinks, is a sad thing. Being come to
Shelden’s, I find my people in the darke in the dining room, merry and
laughing, and, I thought, sporting one with another, which, God helpe
me! raised my jealousy presently. Come in the darke, and one of them
touching me (which afterward I found was Susan) made them shreeke, and
so went out up stairs, leaving them to light a candle and to run out. I
went out and was very vexed till I found my wife was gone with Mr. Hill
and Mercer this day to see me at Greenwich, and these people were at
supper, and the candle on a sudden falling out of the candlesticke
(which I saw as I come through the yarde) and Mrs. Barbary being there
I was well at ease again, and so bethought myself what to do, whether
to go to Greenwich or stay there; at last go I would, and so with a
lanthorne, and 3 or 4 people with me, among others Mr. Browne, who was
there, would go, I walked with a lanthorne and discoursed with him about
paynting and the several sorts of it. I came in good time to Greenwich,
where I found Mr. Hill with my wife, and very glad I was to see him. To
supper and discourse of musique and so to bed, I lying with him talking
till midnight about Berckenshaw’s musique rules, which I did to his
great satisfaction inform him in, and so to sleep.