23rd. Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to White Hall; but there
finding the Duke gone to his lodgings at St. James’s for all together,
his Duchesse being ready to lie in, we to him, and there did our usual
business. And here I met the great newes confirmed by the Duke’s own
relation, by a letter from Captain Allen. First, of our own loss of two
ships, the Phoenix and Nonesuch, in the Bay of Gibraltar: then of his,
and his seven ships with him, in the Bay of Cales, or thereabouts,
fighting with the 34 Dutch Smyrna fleete; sinking the King Salamon,
a ship worth a L150,000 or more, some say L200,000, and another; and
taking of three merchant-ships. Two of our ships were disabled, by the
Dutch unfortunately falling against their will against them; the Advice,
Captain W. Poole, and Antelope, Captain Clerke: The Dutch men-of-war did
little service. Captain Allen did receive many shots at distance
before he would fire one gun, which he did not do till he come within
pistol-shot of his enemy. The Spaniards on shore at Cales did stand
laughing at the Dutch, to see them run away and flee to the shore, 34 or
thereabouts, against eight Englishmen at most. I do purpose to get the
whole relation, if I live, of Captain Allen himself. In our loss of the
two ships in the Bay of Gibraltar, it is observable how the world do
comment upon the misfortune of Captain Moone of the Nonesuch (who did
lose, in the same manner, the Satisfaction), as a person that hath
ill-luck attending him; without considering that the whole fleete was
ashore. Captain Allen led the way, and Captain Allen himself writes that
all the masters of the fleete, old and young, were mistaken, and did
carry their ships aground. But I think I heard the Duke say that Moone,
being put into the Oxford, had in this conflict regained his credit, by
sinking one and taking another. Captain Seale of the Milford hath done
his part very well, in boarding the King Salamon, which held out half an
hour after she was boarded; and his men kept her an hour after they did
master her, and then she sunk, and drowned about 17 of her men. Thence
to Jervas’s, my mind, God forgive me, running too much after some folly,
but ‘elle’ not being within I away by coach to the ‘Change, and thence
home to dinner. And finding Mrs. Bagwell waiting at the office after
dinner, away she and I to a cabaret where she and I have eat before,
and there I had her company ‘tout’ and had ‘mon plaisir’ of ‘elle’. But
strange to see how a woman, notwithstanding her greatest pretences of
love ‘a son mari’ and religion, may be ‘vaincue’. Thence to the Court of
the Turkey Company at Sir Andrew Rickard’s to treat about carrying some
men of ours to Tangier, and had there a very civil reception, though a
denial of the thing as not practicable with them, and I think so too.
So to my office a little and to Jervas’s again, thinking ‘avoir
rencontrais’ Jane, ‘mais elle n’etait pas dedans’. So I back again and
to my office, where I did with great content ‘ferais’ a vow to mind my
business, and ‘laisser aller les femmes’ for a month, and am with all
my heart glad to find myself able to come to so good a resolution, that
thereby I may follow my business, which and my honour thereby lies a
bleeding. So home to supper and to bed.