21st (Lord’s day). Up, and with my wife to church, and her new woman
Barker with her the first time. The girle will, I think, do very well.
Here a lazy sermon, and so home to dinner, and took in my Lady Pen and
Peg (Sir William being below with the fleete), and mighty merry we were,
and then after dinner presently (it being a mighty cool day) I by coach
to White Hall, and there attended the Cabinet, and was called in before
the King and them to give an account of our want of money for Tangier,
which troubles me that it should be my place so often and so soon after
one another to come to speak there of their wants--the thing of the
world that they love least to hear of, and that which is no welcome
thing to be the solicitor for--and to see how like an image the King
sat and could not speak one word when I had delivered myself was very
strange; only my Lord Chancellor did ask me, whether I thought it was in
nature at this time to help us to anything. So I was referred to another
meeting of the Lords Commissioners for Tangier and my Lord Treasurer,
and so went away, and by coach home, where I spent the evening in
reading Stillingfleet’s defence of the Archbishopp, the part about
Purgatory, a point I had never considered before, what was said for it
or against it, and though I do believe we are in the right, yet I do
not see any great matter in this book. So to supper; and my people being
gone, most of them, to bed, my boy and Jane and I did get two of my
iron chests out of the cellar into my closett, and the money to my great
satisfaction to see it there again, and the rather because the damp
cellar spoils all my chests. This being done, and I weary, to bed. This
afternoon walking with Sir H. Cholmly long in the gallery, he told
me, among many other things, how Harry Killigrew is banished the Court
lately, for saying that my Lady Castlemayne was a little lecherous girle
when she was young.... This she complained to the King of, and he sent
to the Duke of York, whose servant he is, to turn him away. The Duke
of York hath done it, but takes it ill of my Lady that he was not
complained to first. She attended him to excute it, but ill blood is
made by it. He told me how Mr. Williamson stood in a little place to
have come into the House of Commons, and they would not choose him;
they said, “No courtier.” And which is worse, Bab May went down in great
state to Winchelsea with the Duke of York’s letters, not doubting to be
chosen; and there the people chose a private gentleman in spite of him,
and cried out they would have no Court pimp to be their burgesse; which
are things that bode very ill. This afternoon I went to see and sat a
good while with Mrs. Martin, and there was her sister Doll, with whom,
contrary to all expectation, I did what I would, and might have done
anything else.