23rd. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes to White Hall, where we and the rest
attended the Duke of York, where, among other things, we had a complaint
of Sir William Jennings against his lieutenant, Le Neve, one that had
been long the Duke’s page, and for whom the Duke of York hath great
kindness. It was a drunken quarrel, where one was as blameable as the
other. It was referred to further examination, but the Duke of
York declared, that as he would not favour disobedience, so neither
drunkenness, and therein he said very well. Thence with Sir W. Coventry
to Westminster Hall, and there parted, he having told me how Sir J.
Minnes do disagree from the proposition of resigning his place, and that
so the whole matter is again at a stand, at which I am sorry for the
King’s sake, but glad that Sir W. Pen is again defeated, for I would not
have him come to be Comptroller if I could help it, he will be so cruel
proud. Here I spoke with Sir G. Downing about our prisoners in Holland,
and their being released; which he is concerned in, and most of them
are. Then, discoursing of matters of the House of Parliament, he tells
me that it is not the fault of the House, but the King’s own party, that
have hindered the passing of the Bill for money, by their popping in
of new projects for raising it: which is a strange thing; and mighty
confident he is, that what money is raised, will be raised and put into
the same form that the last was, to come into the Exchequer; and, for
aught I see, I must confess I think it is the best way. Thence down to
the Hall, and there walked awhile, and all the talk is about Scotland,
what news thence; but there is nothing come since the first report, and
so all is given over for nothing. Thence home, and after dinner to my
chamber with Creed, who come and dined with me, and he and I to reckon
for his salary, and by and by comes in Colonel Atkins, and I did the
like with him, and it was Creed’s design to bring him only for his
own ends, to seem to do him a courtesy, and it is no great matter. The
fellow I hate, and so I think all the world else do. Then to talk of
my report I am to make of the state of our wants of money to the Lord
Treasurer, but our discourse come to little. However, in the evening, to
be rid of him, I took coach and saw him to the Temple and there ‘light,
and he being gone, with all the haste back again and to my chamber late
to enter all this day’s matters of account, and to draw up my report to
my Lord Treasurer, and so to bed. At the Temple I called at Playford’s,
and there find that his new impression of his ketches

     [John Hilton’s “Catch that catch can, or a Choice Collection of
     Catches, Rounds and Canons for 3 or 4 voyces,” was first published
     by Playford in 1651 or 1652.  The book was republished “with large
     additions by John Playford” in 1658.  The edition referred to in the
     text was published in 1667 with a second title of “The Musical
     Companion.”  The book was republished in 1672-73.]

are not yet out, the fire having hindered it, but his man tells me that
it will be a very fine piece, many things new being added to it.