28th. Up, and Creed and I walked (a very fine walk in the frost) to my
Lord Bellasses, but missing him did find him at White Hall, and there
spoke with him about some Tangier business. That done, we to Creed’s
lodgings, which are very pretty, but he is going from them. So we to
Lincoln’s Inne Fields, he to Ned Pickering’s, who it seems lives there,
keeping a good house, and I to my Lord Crew’s, where I dined, and hear
the newes how my Lord’s brother, Mr. Nathaniel Crew, hath an estate of 6
or L700 per annum, left him by the death of an old acquaintance of his,
but not akin to him at all. And this man is dead without will, but had,
above ten years since, made over his estate to this Mr. Crew, to him and
his heirs for ever, and given Mr. Crew the keeping of the deeds in
his own hand all this time; by which, if he would, he might have taken
present possession of the estate, for he knew what they were. This is as
great an act of confident friendship as this latter age, I believe,
can shew. From hence to the Duke’s house, and there saw “Macbeth” most
excellently acted, and a most excellent play for variety. I had sent for
my wife to meet me there, who did come, and after the play was done, I
out so soon to meet her at the other door that I left my cloake in the
playhouse, and while I returned to get it, she was gone out and missed
me, and with W. Hewer away home. I not sorry for it much did go to White
Hall, and got my Lord Bellasses to get me into the playhouse; and
there, after all staying above an hour for the players, the King and all
waiting, which was absurd, saw “Henry the Fifth” well done by the Duke’s
people, and in most excellent habits, all new vests, being put on but
this night. But I sat so high and far off, that I missed most of the
words, and sat with a wind coming into my back and neck, which did much
trouble me. The play continued till twelve at night; and then up, and a
most horrid cold night it was, and frosty, and moonshine. But the worst
was, I had left my cloak at Sir G. Carteret’s, and they being abed I was
forced to go home without it. So by chance got a coach and to the Golden
Lion Taverne in the Strand, and there drank some mulled sack, and so
home, where find my poor wife staying for me, and then to bed mighty
cold.