13th. It cost me till four o’clock in the morning, and, which was pretty
to think, I was above an hour, after I had made all right, in casting
up of about twenty sums, being dozed with much work, and had for forty
times together forgot to carry the 60 which I had in my mind, in one
denomination which exceeded 60; and this did confound me for above an
hour together. At last all even and done, and so to bed. Up at seven,
and so to the office, after looking over my last night’s work. We sat
all the morning. At noon by coach with my Lord Bruncker and ‘light at
the Temple, and so alone I to dinner at a cooke’s, and thence to my
Lord Bellasses, whom I find kind; but he had drawn some new proposal
to deliver to the Lords Commissioners to-day, wherein one was, that the
garrison would not be well paid without some goldsmith’s undertaking
the paying of the bills of exchange for Tallys. He professing so
much kindness to me, and saying that he would not be concerned in the
garrison without me; and that if he continued in the employment, no man
should have to do with the money but myself. I did ask his Lordship’s
meaning of the proposition in his paper. He told me he had not much
considered it, but that he meant no harm to me. I told him I thought it
would render me useless; whereupon he did very frankly, after my seeming
denials for a good while, cause it to be writ over again, and that
clause left out, which did satisfy me abundantly. It being done, he and
I together to White Hall, and there the Duke of York (who is gone over
to all his pleasures again, and leaves off care of business, what with
his woman, my Lady Denham, and his hunting three times a week) was just
come in from hunting. So I stood and saw him dress himself, and try on
his vest, which is the King’s new fashion, and will be in it for good
and all on Monday next, and the whole Court: it is a fashion, the King
says; he will never change. He being ready, he and my Lord Chancellor,
and Duke of Albemarle, and Prince Rupert, Lord Bellasses, Sir H.
Cholmly, Povy, and myself, met at a Committee for Tangier. My Lord
Bellasses’s propositions were read and discoursed of, about reducing
the garrison to less charge; and indeed I am mad in love with my Lord
Chancellor, for he do comprehend and speak out well, and with the
greatest easinesse and authority that ever I saw man in my life. I
did never observe how much easier a man do speak when he knows all
the company to be below him, than in him; for though he spoke, indeed,
excellent welt, yet his manner and freedom of doing it, as if he played
with it, and was informing only all the rest of the company, was mighty
pretty. He did call again and again upon Mr. Povy for his accounts. I
did think fit to make the solemn tender of my accounts that I intended.
I said something that was liked, touching the want of money, and the bad
credit of our tallys. My Lord Chancellor moved, that without any trouble
to any of the rest of the Lords, I might alone attend the King, when he
was with his private Council; and open the state of the garrison’s want
of credit; and all that could be done, should. Most things moved were
referred to Committees, and so we broke up. And at the end Sir W.
Coventry come; so I away with him, and he discoursed with me something
of the Parliament’s business. They have voted giving the [King] for next
year L1,800,000; which, were it not for his debts, were a great sum.
He says, he thinks the House may say no more to us for the present, but
that we must mend our manners against the next tryall, and mend them
we will. But he thinks it not a fit time to be found making of trouble
among ourselves, meaning about Sir J. Minnes, who most certainly must be
removed, or made a Commissioner, and somebody else Comptroller. But he
tells me that the House has a great envy at Sir G. Carteret, and that
had he ever thought fit in all his discourse to have touched upon the
point of our want of money and badness of payment, it would have been
laid hold on to Sir G. Carteret’s hurt; but he hath avoided it, though
without much reason for it, most studiously, and in short did end thus,
that he has never shewn so much of the pigeon in all his life as in his
innocence to Sir G. Carteret at this time; which I believe, and will
desire Sir G. Carteret to thank him for it. So we broke up and I by
coach home, calling for a new pair of shoes, and so, little being to do
at the office, did go home, and after spending a little in righting some
of my books, which stood out of order, I to bed.