Sept.  19, 1666;” annexed is “A True Declaration of all
     transactions between his Majesty of Great Britain and the King of
     Denmark, with a declaration of war against the said king, and the
     motives that obliged his Majesty thereunto” (“Calendar of State
     Papers,” 1666-67, p. 140).]

Viner too, and Backewell, were sent for this afternoon; and was before
the King and his Cabinet about money; they declaring they would advance
no more, it being discoursed of in the House of Parliament for the King
to issue out his privy-seals to them to command them to trust him, which
gives them reason to decline trusting. But more money they are persuaded
to lend, but so little that (with horrour I speake it), coming after the
Council was up, with Sir G. Carteret, Sir W. Coventry, Lord Bruncker,
and myself, I did lay the state of our condition before the Duke of
York, that the fleete could not go out without several things it wanted,
and we could not have without money, particularly rum and bread, which
we have promised the man Swan to helpe him to L200 of his debt, and
a few other small sums of L200 a piece to some others, and that I do
foresee the Duke of York would call us to an account why the fleete is
not abroad, and we cannot answer otherwise than our want of money; and
that indeed we do not do the King any service now, but do rather abuse
and betray his service by being there, and seeming to do something,
while we do not. Sir G. Carteret asked me (just in these words, for
in this and all the rest I set down the very words for memory sake, if
there should be occasion) whether L50 or L60 would do us any good; and
when I told him the very rum man must have L200, he held up his eyes as
if we had asked a million. Sir W. Coventry told the Duke of York plainly
he did rather desire to have his commission called in than serve in so
ill a place, where he cannot do the King service, and I did concur
in saying the same. This was all very plain, and the Duke of York did
confess that he did not see how we could do anything without a present
supply of L20,000, and that he would speak to the King next Council day,
and I promised to wait on him to put him in mind of it. This I set down
for my future justification, if need be, and so we broke up, and all
parted, Sir W. Coventry being not very well, but I believe made much
worse by this night’s sad discourse. So I home by coach, considering
what the consequence of all this must be in a little time. Nothing but
distraction and confusion; which makes me wish with all my heart that I
were well and quietly settled with what little I have got at Brampton,
where I might live peaceably, and study, and pray for the good of the
King and my country. Home, and to Sir W. Batten’s, where I saw my Lady,
who is now come down stairs after a great sickness. Sir W. Batten was
at the pay to-day, and tells me how rude the men were, but did go away
quietly, being promised pay on Wednesday next. God send us money for
it! So to the office, and then to supper and to bed. Among other things
proposed in the House to-day, to give the King in lieu of chimneys,
there was the bringing up of sealed paper, such as Sir J. Minnes shewed
me to-night, at Sir W. Batten’s, is used in Spayne, and brings the King
a great revenue; but it shows what shifts we are put to too much.