28th (Ash Wednesday). Up, and after doing a little business at my office
I walked, it being a most curious dry and cold morning, to White Hall,
and there I went into the Parke, and meeting Sir Ph. Warwicke took a
turne with him in the Pell Mall, talking of the melancholy posture of
affairs, where every body is snarling one at another, and all things put
together looke ominously. This new Act too putting us out of a power of
raising money. So that he fears as I do, but is fearfull of enlarging
in that discourse of an ill condition in every thing, and the State and
all. We appointed another time to meet to talke of the business of the
Navy alone seriously, and so parted, and I to White Hall, and there we
did our business with the Duke of Yorke, and so parted, and walked to
Westminster Hall, where I staid talking with Mrs. Michell and Howlett
long and her daughter, which is become a mighty pretty woman, and thence
going out of the Hall was called to by Mrs. Martin, so I went to her and
bought two bands, and so parted, and by and by met at her chamber, and
there did what I would, and so away home and there find Mrs. Knipp,
and we dined together, she the pleasantest company in the world. After
dinner I did give my wife money to lay out on Knipp, 20s., and I abroad
to White Hall to visit Colonell Norwood, and then Sir G. Carteret, with
whom I have brought myself right again, and he very open to me; is very
melancholy, and matters, I fear, go down with him, but he seems most
afeard of a general catastrophe to the whole kingdom, and thinks, as I
fear, that all things will come to nothing. Thence to the Palace Yard,
to the Swan, and there staid till it was dark, and then to Mrs. Lane’s,
and there lent her L5 upon L4 01s. in gold. And then did what I would
with her, and I perceive she is come to be very bad, and offers any
thing, that it is dangerous to have to do with her, nor will I see [her]
any more a good while. Thence by coach home and to the office, where a
while, and then betimes to bed by ten o’clock, sooner than I have done
many a day. And thus ends this month, with my mind full of resolution
to apply myself better from this time forward to my business than I have
done these six or eight days, visibly to my prejudice both in quiett
of mind and setting backward of my business, that I cannot give a good
account of it as I ought to do.