6th. Up, and to the office a while, and then by water to my Lady
Montagu’s, at Westminster, and there visited my Lard Hinchingbroke,
newly come from Hinchingbroke, and find him a mighty sober gentleman,
to my great content. Thence to Sir Ph. Warwicke and my Lord Treasurer’s,
but failed in my business; so home and in Fenchurch-streete met with Mr.
Battersby; says he, “Do you see Dan Rawlinson’s door shut up?” (which I
did, and wondered). “Why,” says he, “after all the sickness, and himself
spending all the last year in the country, one of his men is now dead
of the plague, and his wife and one of his mayds sicke, and himself shut
up;” which troubles me mightily. So home; and there do hear also from
Mrs. Sarah Daniel, that Greenwich is at this time much worse than ever
it was, and Deptford too: and she told us that they believed all
the towne would leave the towne and come to London; which is now the
receptacle of all the people from all infected places. God preserve us!
So by and by to dinner, and, after dinner in comes Mrs. Knipp, and I
being at the office went home to her, and there I sat and talked with
her, it being the first time of her being here since her being brought
to bed. I very pleasant with her; but perceive my wife hath no great
pleasure in her being here, she not being pleased with my kindnesse
to her. However, we talked and sang, and were very pleasant. By and by
comes Mr. Pierce and his wife, the first time she also hath been here
since her lying-in, both having been brought to bed of boys, and both
of them dead. And here we talked, and were pleasant, only my wife in
a chagrin humour, she not being pleased with my kindnesse to either of
them, and by and by she fell into some silly discourse wherein I checked
her, which made her mighty pettish, and discoursed mighty offensively to
Mrs. Pierce, which did displease me, but I would make no words, but put
the discourse by as much as I could (it being about a report that my
wife said was made of herself and meant by Mrs. Pierce, that she was
grown a gallant, when she had but so few suits of clothes these two or
three years, and a great deale of that silly discourse), and by and by
Mrs. Pierce did tell her that such discourses should not trouble her,
for there went as bad on other people, and particularly of herself at
this end of the towne, meaning my wife, that she was crooked, which was
quite false, which my wife had the wit not to acknowledge herself to be
the speaker of, though she has said it twenty times. But by this means
we had little pleasure in their visit; however, Knipp and I sang, and
then I offered them to carry them home, and to take my wife with me, but
she would not go: so I with them, leaving my wife in a very ill humour,
and very slighting to them, which vexed me. However, I would not be
removed from my civility to them, but sent for a coach, and went with
them; and, in our way, Knipp saying that she come out of doors without
a dinner to us, I took them to Old Fish Streete, to the very house and
woman where I kept my wedding dinner, where I never was since, and there
I did give them a joie of salmon, and what else was to be had. And here
we talked of the ill-humour of my wife, which I did excuse as much as
I could, and they seemed to admit of it, but did both confess they
wondered at it; but from thence to other discourse, and among others
to that of my Lord Bruncker and Mrs. Williams, who it seems do speake
mighty hardly of me for my not treating them, and not giving her
something to her closett, and do speake worse of my wife, and
dishonourably, but it is what she do of all the world, though she be a
whore herself; so I value it not. But they told me how poorly my Lord
carried himself the other day to his kinswoman, Mrs. Howard, and was
displeased because she called him uncle to a little gentlewoman that
is there with him, which he will not admit of; for no relation is to
be challenged from others to a lord, and did treat her thereupon very
rudely and ungenteely. Knipp tells me also that my Lord keeps another
woman besides Mrs. Williams; and that, when I was there the other day,
there was a great hubbub in the house, Mrs. Williams being fallen sicke,
because my Lord was gone to his other mistresse, making her wait for
him, till his return from the other mistresse; and a great deale of do
there was about it; and Mrs. Williams swounded at it, at the very time
when I was there and wondered at the reason of my being received so
negligently. I set them both at home, Knipp at her house, her husband
being at the doore; and glad she was to be found to have staid out so
long with me and Mrs. Pierce, and none else; and Mrs. Pierce at her
house, and am mightily pleased with the discretion of her during the
simplicity and offensiveness of my wife’s discourse this afternoon. I
perceive by the new face at Mrs. Pierces door that our Mary is gone from
her. So I home, calling on W. Joyce in my coach, and staid and talked a
little with him, who is the same silly prating fellow that ever he
was, and so home, and there find my wife mightily out of order, and
reproaching of Mrs. Pierce and Knipp as wenches, and I know not what.
But I did give her no words to offend her, and quietly let all pass, and
so to bed without any good looke or words to or from my wife.