31st. Waked very betimes in the morning by extraordinary thunder and
rain, which did keep me sleeping and waking till very late, and it being
a holiday and my eye very sore, and myself having had very little sleep
for a good while till nine o’clock, and so up, and so saw all my family
up, and my father and sister, who is a pretty good-bodied woman, and not
over thicke, as I thought she would have been, but full of freckles,
and not handsome in face. And so I out by water among the ships, and to
Deptford and Blackewall about business, and so home and to dinner with
my father and sister and family, mighty pleasant all of us; and, among
other things, with a sparrow that our Mercer hath brought up now for
three weeks, which is so tame that it flies up and down, and upon the
table, and eats and pecks, and do everything so pleasantly, that we are
mightily pleased with it. After dinner I to my papers and accounts of
this month to sett all straight, it being a publique Fast-day appointed
to pray for the good successe of the fleete. But it is a pretty thing to
consider how little a matter they make of this keeping of a Fast, that
it was not so much as declared time enough to be read in the churches
the last Sunday; but ordered by proclamation since: I suppose upon some
sudden newes of the Dutch being come out. To my accounts and settled
them clear; but to my grief find myself poorer than I was the last by
near L20, by reason of my being forced to return L50 to Downing, the
smith, which he had presented me with. However, I am well contented,
finding myself yet to be worth L5,200. Having done, to supper with my
wife, and then to finish the writing fair of my accounts, and so to bed.
This day come to town Mr. Homewood, and I took him home in the evening
to my chamber, and discoursed with him about my business of the
Victualling, which I have a mind to employ him in, and he is desirous of
also, but do very ingenuously declare he understands it not so well as
other things, and desires to be informed in the nature of it before he
attempts it, which I like well, and so I carried him to Mr. Gibson to
discourse with him about it, and so home again to my accounts. Thus
ends this month, with my mind oppressed by my defect in my duty of the
Victualling, which lies upon me as a burden, till I get myself into
a better posture therein, and hinders me and casts down my courage in
every thing else that belongs to me, and the jealousy I have of Sir W.
Coventry’s being displeased with me about it; but I hope in a little
time to remedy all. As to publique business; by late tidings of the
French fleete being come to Rochelle (how true, though, I know not) our
fleete is divided; Prince Rupert being gone with about thirty ships to
the Westward as is conceived to meet the French, to hinder their coming
to join with the Dutch. My Lord Duke of Albemarle lies in the Downes
with the rest, and intends presently to sail to the Gunfleete.