22nd (Lord’s day). Up, and put on my new black coate, long down to my
knees, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, where all in deep mourning
for the Queene’s mother. There had great discourse, before the Duke
and Sir W. Coventry begun the discourse of the day about the purser’s
business, which I seconded, and with great liking to the Duke, whom
however afterward my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Pen did stop by some thing
they said, though not much to the purpose, yet because our proposition
had some appearance of certain charge to the King it was ruled that for
this year we should try another the same in every respect with ours,
leaving out one circumstance of allowing the pursers the victuals of all
men short of the complement. I was very well satisfied with it and am
contented to try it, wishing it may prove effectual. Thence away with
Sir W. Batten in his coach home, in our way he telling me the certaine
newes, which was afterward confirmed to me this day by several, that the
Bishopp of Munster has made a league [with] the Hollanders, and that our
King and Court are displeased much at it: moreover we are not sure of
Sweden. I home to my house, and there dined mighty well, my poor wife
and Mercer and I. So back again walked to White Hall, and there to and
again in the Parke, till being in the shoemaker’s stockes.--[A cant
expression for tight shoes.]--I was heartily weary, yet walked however
to the Queene’s Chappell at St. James’s, and there saw a little mayde
baptized; many parts and words whereof are the same with that of our
Liturgy, and little that is more ceremonious than ours. Thence walked to
Westminster and eat a bit of bread and drank, and so to Worster House,
and there staid, and saw the Council up, and then back, walked to the
Cockepitt, and there took my leave of the Duke of Albemarle, who is
going to-morrow to sea. He seems mightily pleased with me, which I am
glad of; but I do find infinitely my concernment in being careful to
appear to the King and Duke to continue my care of his business, and to
be found diligent as I used to be. Thence walked wearily as far as Fleet
Streete and so there met a coach and home to supper and to bed, having
sat a great while with Will Joyce, who come to see me, and it is the
first time I have seen him at my house since the plague, and find him
the same impertinent, prating coxcombe that ever he was.