6th. Up, and after doing some business at my office abroad to Lumbard
Street, about the getting of a good sum of money, thence home, in
preparation for my having some good sum in my hands, for fear of a
trouble in the State, that I may not have all I have in the world out
of my hands and so be left a beggar. Having put that in a way, I home
to the office, and so to the Tower; about shipping of some more pressed
men, and that done, away to Broad Streete, to Sir G. Carteret, who is
at a pay of tickets all alone, and I believe not less than one thousand
people in the streets. But it is a pretty thing to observe that both
there and every where else, a man shall see many women now-a-days of
mean sort in the streets, but no men; men being so afeard of the press.
I dined with Sir G. Carteret, and after dinner had much discourse about
our publique business; and he do seem to fear every day more and more
what I do; which is, a general confusion in the State; plainly answering
me to the question, who is it that the weight of the warr depends
[upon]? that it is only Sir W. Coventry. He tells me, too, the Duke of
Albemarle is dissatisfied, and that the Duchesse do curse Coventry as
the man that betrayed her husband to the sea: though I believe that it
is not so. Thence to Lumbard Streete, and received L2000, and carried it
home: whereof L1000 in gold. The greatest quantity not only that I ever
had of gold, but that ever I saw together, and is not much above half
a 100 lb. bag full, but is much weightier. This I do for security sake,
and convenience of carriage; though it costs me above L70 the change of
it, at 18 1/2d. per piece. Being at home, I there met with a letter from
Bab Allen,--[Mrs. Knipp]--to invite me to be god-father to her boy, with
Mrs. Williams, which I consented to, but know not the time when it is
to be. Thence down to the Old Swan, calling at Michell’s, he not being
within, and there I did steal a kiss or two of her, and staying a little
longer, he come in, and her father, whom I carried to Westminster, my
business being thither, and so back again home, and very busy all the
evening. At night a song in the garden and to bed.