April 1st (Lord’s day). Up and abroad, and by coach to Charing Cross,
to wait on Sir Philip Howard; whom I found in bed: and he do receive me
very civilly. My request was about suffering my wife’s brother to go
to sea, and to save his pay in the Duke’s guards; which after a little
difficulty he did with great respect agree to. I find him a very
fine-spoken gentleman, and one of great parts, and very courteous. Much
pleased with this visit I to White Hall, where I met Sir G. Downing,
and to discourse with him an houre about the Exchequer payments upon the
late Act, and informed myself of him thoroughly in my safety in lending
L2000 to Sir W. Warren, upon an order of his upon the Exchequer
for L2602 and I do purpose to do it. Thence meeting Dr. Allen, the
physician, he and I and another walked in the Parke, a most pleasant
warm day, and to the Queene’s chappell; where I do not so dislike the
musique. Here I saw on a post an invitation to all good Catholiques to
pray for the soul of such a one departed this life. The Queene, I hear,
do not yet hear of the death of her mother, she being in a course of
physique, that they dare not tell it her. At noon by coach home, and
there by invitation met my uncle and aunt Wight and their cozen Mary,
and dined with me and very merry. After dinner my uncle and I abroad by
coach to White Hall, up and down the house, and I did some business and
thence with him and a gentleman he met with to my Lord Chancellor’s new
house, and there viewed it again and again and up to the top and I like
it as well as ever and think it a most noble house. So all up and down
my Lord St. Albans his new building and market-house, and the taverne
under the market-house, looking to and again into every place of
building, and so away and took coach and home, where to my accounts, and
was at them till I could not hold open my eyes, and so to bed. I this
afternoon made a visit to my Lady Carteret, whom I understood newly come
to towne; and she took it mighty kindly, but I see her face and heart
are dejected from the condition her husband’s matters stand in. But I
hope they will do all well enough. And I do comfort her as much as I
can, for she is a noble lady.