19th. Lay pretty long in bed talking with pleasure with my wife, and
then up and all the morning at my own chamber fitting some Tangier
matters against the afternoon for a meeting. This morning also came Mr.
Caesar, and I heard him on the lute very finely, and my boy begins to
play well. After dinner I carried and set my wife down at her brother’s,
and then to Barkeshire-house, where my Lord Chancellor hath been ever
since the fire, but he is not come home yet, so I to Westminster Hall,
where the Lords newly up and the Commons still sitting. Here I met with
Mr. Robinson, who did give me a printed paper wherein he states his
pretence to the post office, and intends to petition the Parliament in
it. Thence I to the Bull-head tavern, where I have not been since Mr.
Chetwind and the time of our club, and here had six bottles of claret
filled, and I sent them to Mrs. Martin, whom I had promised some of
my owne, and, having none of my owne, sent her this. Thence to my Lord
Chancellor’s, and there Mr. Creed and Gawden, Cholmley, and Sir G.
Carteret walking in the Park over against the house. I walked with Sir
G. Carteret, who I find displeased with the letter I have drawn and sent
in yesterday, finding fault with the account we give of the ill state of
the Navy, but I said little, only will justify the truth of it. Here we
walked to and again till one dropped away after another, and so I
took coach to White Hall, and there visited my Lady Jemimah, at Sir G.
Carteret’s lodgings. Here was Sir Thomas Crew, and he told me how hot
words grew again to-day in the House of Lords between my Lord Ossory and
Ashly, the former saying that something said by the other was said like
one of Oliver’s Council. Ashly said that he must give him reparation,
or he would take it his owne way. The House therefore did bring my Lord
Ossory to confess his fault, and ask pardon for it, as he was also to
my Lord Buckingham, for saying that something was not truth that my Lord
Buckingham had said. This will render my Lord Ossory very little in a
little time. By and by away, and calling my wife went home, and then a
little at Sir W. Batten’s to hear news, but nothing, and then home to
supper, whither Captain Cocke, half foxed, come and sat with us, and so
away, and then we to bed.