28th. Up, and to the office, where no more newes of the fleete than was
yesterday. Here we sat and at noon to dinner to the Pope’s Head, where
my Lord Bruncker and his mistresse dined and Commissioner Pett, Dr.
Charleton, and myself, entertained with a venison pasty by Sir W.
Warren. Here very pretty discourse of Dr. Charleton’s, concerning
Nature’s fashioning every creature’s teeth according to the food she
intends them; and that men’s, it is plain, was not for flesh, but for
fruit, and that he can at any time tell the food of a beast unknown
by the teeth. My Lord Bruncker made one or two objections to it that
creatures find their food proper for their teeth rather than that
the teeth were fitted for the food, but the Doctor, I think, did well
observe that creatures do naturally and from the first, before they have
had experience to try, do love such a food rather than another, and that
all children love fruit, and none brought to flesh, but against their
wills at first. Thence with my Lord Bruncker to White Hall, where no
news. So to St. James’s to Sir W. Coventry, and there hear only of the
Bredah’s being come in and gives the same small account that the other
did yesterday, so that we know not what is done by the body of the
fleete at all, but conceive great reason to hope well. Thence with my
Lord to his coach-house, and there put in his six horses into his coach,
and he and I alone to Highgate. All the way going and coming I learning
of him the principles of Optickes, and what it is that makes an object
seem less or bigger and how much distance do lessen an object, and
that it is not the eye at all, or any rule in optiques, that can tell
distance, but it is only an act of reason comparing of one mark with
another, which did both please and inform me mightily. Being come
thither we went to my Lord Lauderdale’s house to speake with him, about
getting a man at Leith to joyne with one we employ to buy some prize
goods for the King; we find [him] and his lady and some Scotch people
at supper. Pretty odd company; though my Lord Bruncker tells me, my Lord
Lauderdale is a man of mighty good reason and judgement. But at supper
there played one of their servants upon the viallin some Scotch tunes
only; several, and the best of their country, as they seemed to esteem
them, by their praising and admiring them: but, Lord! the strangest ayre
that ever I heard in my life, and all of one cast. But strange to hear
my Lord Lauderdale say himself that he had rather hear a cat mew, than
the best musique in the world; and the better the musique, the more
sicke it makes him; and that of all instruments, he hates the lute most,
and next to that, the baggpipe. Thence back with my Lord to his house,
all the way good discourse, informing of myself about optiques still,
and there left him and by a hackney home, and after writing three or
four letters, home to supper and to bed.