18th. [Up] and by coach with Sir W. Batten and Sir Thos. Allen to White
Hall, and there after attending the Duke as usual and there concluding
of many things preparatory to the Prince and Generall’s going to sea on
Monday next, Sir W. Batten and Sir T. Allen and I to Mr. Lilly’s, the
painter’s; and there saw the heads, some finished, and all begun, of
the Flaggmen in the late great fight with the Duke of Yorke against the
Dutch. The Duke of Yorke hath them done to hang in his chamber, and very
finely they are done indeed. Here is the Prince’s, Sir G. Askue’s, Sir
Thomas Teddiman’s, Sir Christopher Mings, Sir Joseph Jordan, Sir William
Barkeley, Sir Thomas Allen, and Captain Harman’s, as also the Duke
of Albemarle’s; and will be my Lord Sandwich’s, Sir W. Pen’s, and Sir
Jeremy Smith’s. Being very well satisfied with this sight, and other
good pictures hanging in the house, we parted, and I left them, and [to]
pass away a little time went to the printed picture seller’s in the way
thence to the Exchange, and there did see great plenty of fine prints;
but did not buy any, only a print of an old pillar in Rome made for a
Navall Triumph,

     [The columna rostrata erected in the Forum to C. Duilius, who
     obtained a triumph for the first naval victory over the
     Carthaginians, B.C. 261.  Part of the column was discovered in the
     ruins of the Forum near the Arch of Septimius, and transferred to
     the Capitol.--B.]

which for the antiquity of the shape of ships, I buy and keepe. Thence
to the Exchange, that is, the New Exchange, and looked over some play
books and intend to get all the late new plays. So to Westminster, and
there at the Swan got a bit of meat and dined alone; and so away toward
King’s Street, and spying out of my coach Jane that lived heretofore at
Jevons, my barber’s, I went a little further and stopped, and went on
foot back, and overtook her, taking water at Westminster Bridge, and
spoke to her, and she telling me whither she was going I over the water
and met her at Lambeth, and there drank with her; she telling me how he
that was so long her servant, did prove to be a married man, though
her master told me (which she denies) that he had lain with her several
times in his house. There left her ‘sans essayer alcune cose con elle’,
and so away by boat to the ‘Change, and took coach and to Mr. Hales,
where he would have persuaded me to have had the landskipp stand in my
picture, but I like it not and will have it otherwise, which I perceive
he do not like so well, however is so civil as to say it shall be
altered. Thence away to Mrs. Pierces, who was not at home, but gone to
my house to visit me with Mrs. Knipp. I therefore took up the little
girle Betty and my mayde Mary that now lives there and to my house,
where they had been but were gone, so in our way back again met them
coming back again to my house in Cornehill, and there stopped laughing
at our pretty misfortunes, and so I carried them to Fish Streete, and
there treated them with prawns and lobsters, and it beginning to grow
darke we away, but the jest is our horses would not draw us up the Hill,
but we were fain to ‘light and stay till the coachman had made them draw
down to the bottom of the Hill, thereby warming their legs, and then
they came up cheerfully enough, and we got up and I carried them home,
and coming home called at my paper ruler’s and there found black Nan,
which pleases me mightily, and having saluted her again and again away
home and to bed..... In all my ridings in the coach and intervals my
mind hath been full these three weeks of setting in musique “It is
decreed, &c.”