3rd (Lord’s-day; Whit-sunday). Up, and by water to White Hall, and there
met with Mr. Coventry, who tells me the only news from the fleete is
brought by Captain Elliott, of The Portland, which, by being run on
board by The Guernsey, was disabled from staying abroad; so is come in
to Aldbrough. That he saw one of the Dutch great ships blown up, and
three on fire. That they begun to fight on Friday; and at his coming
into port, he could make another ship of the King’s coming in, which he
judged to be the Rupert: that he knows of no other hurt to our ships.
With this good newes I home by water again, and to church in the
sermon-time, and with great joy told it my fellows in the pew. So home
after church time to dinner, and after dinner my father, wife, sister,
and Mercer by water to Woolwich, while I walked by land, and saw the
Exchange as full of people, and hath been all this noon as of any other
day, only for newes. I to St. Margaret’s, Westminster, and there saw at
church my pretty Betty Michell, and thence to the Abbey, and so to Mrs.
Martin, and there did what ‘je voudrais avec her.... So by and by he
come in, and after some discourse with him I away to White Hall, and
there met with this bad newes farther, that the Prince come to Dover but
at ten o’clock last night, and there heard nothing of a fight; so that
we are defeated of all our hopes of his helpe to the fleete. It is also
reported by some Victuallers that the Duke of Albemarle and Holmes their
flags were shot down, and both fain to come to anchor to renew their
rigging and sails. A letter is also come this afternoon, from Harman
in the Henery; which is she [that] was taken by Elliott for the Rupert;
that being fallen into the body of the Dutch fleete, he made his way
through them, was set on by three fire-ships one after another, got two
of them off, and disabled the third; was set on fire himself; upon
which many of his men leapt into the sea and perished; among others, the
parson first. Have lost above 100 men, and a good many women (God knows
what is become of Balty), and at last quenched his own fire and got to
Aldbrough; being, as all say, the greatest hazard that ever any ship
escaped, and as bravely managed by him. The mast of the third fire-ship
fell into their ship on fire, and hurt Harman’s leg, which makes him
lame now, but not dangerous. I to Sir G. Carteret, who told me there
hath been great bad management in all this; that the King’s orders
that went on Friday for calling back the Prince, were sent but by the
ordinary post on Wednesday; and come to the Prince his hands but on
Friday; and then, instead of sailing presently, he stays till four in
the evening. And that which is worst of all, the Hampshire, laden with
merchants’ money, come from the Straights, set out with or but just
before the fleete, and was in the Downes by five in the clock yesterday
morning; and the Prince with his fleete come to Dover but at ten of the
clock at night. This is hard to answer, if it be true. This puts great
astonishment into the King, and Duke, and Court, every body being out of
countenance. So meeting Creed, he and I by coach to Hide Parke alone to
talke of these things, and do blesse God that my Lord Sandwich was
not here at this time to be concerned in a business like to be so
misfortunate. It was a pleasant thing to consider how fearfull I was of
being seen with Creed all this afternoon, for fear of people’s thinking
that by our relation to my Lord Sandwich we should be making ill
construction of the Prince’s failure. But, God knows, I am heartily
sorry for the sake of the whole nation, though, if it were not for that,
it would not be amisse to have these high blades find some checke to
their presumption and their disparaging of as good men. Thence set him
down in Covent Guarden and so home by the ‘Change, which is full of
people still, and all talk highly of the failure of the Prince in
not making more haste after his instructions did come, and of our
managements here in not giving it sooner and with more care and oftener.
Thence. After supper to bed.