9th. Up by five o’clock, which I have not a long time done, and down the
river by water to Deptford, among other things to examine the state of
Ironworke, in order to the doing something with reference to Downing
that may induce him to returne me the 50 pieces. Walked back again
reading of my Civill Law Book, and so home and by coach to White Hall,
where we did our usual business before the Duke, and heard the Duke
commend Deane’s ship “The Rupert” before “The Defyance,” built lately by
Castle, in hearing of Sir W. Batten, which pleased me mightily. Thence
by water to Westminster, and there looked after my Tangier order, and so
by coach to Mrs. Pierces, thinking to have gone to Hales’s, but she was
not ready, so away home and to dinner, and after dinner out by coach to
Lovett’s to have forwarded what I have doing there, but find him and his
pretty wife gone to my house to show me something. So away to my Lord
Treasurer’s, and thence to Pierces, where I find Knipp, and I took them
to Hales’s to see our pictures finished, which are very pretty, but I
like not hers half so well as I thought at first, it being not so like,
nor so well painted as I expected, or as mine and my wife’s are. Thence
with them to Cornhill to call and choose a chimney-piece for Pierces
closett, and so home, where my wife in mighty pain and mightily vexed
at my being abroad with these women; and when they were gone called them
whores and I know not what, which vexed me, having been so innocent with
them. So I with them to Mrs. Turner’s and there sat with them a while,
anon my wife sends for me, I come, and what was it but to scold at me
and she would go abroad to take the ayre presently, that she would. So
I left my company and went with her to Bow, but was vexed and spoke not
one word to her all the way going nor coming, or being come home, but
went up straight to bed. Half an hour after (she in the coach leaning on
me as being desirous to be friends) she comes up mighty sicke with a fit
of the cholique and in mighty pain and calls for me out of the bed; I
rose and held her, she prays me to forgive her, and in mighty pain
we put her to bed, where the pain ceased by and by, and so had some
asparagus to our bed side for supper and very kindly afterward to sleepe
and good friends in the morning.