16th (Lord’s day). Lay long talking with my wife in bed, then up with
great content and to my chamber to set right a picture or two, Lovett
having sent me yesterday Sancta Clara’s head varnished, which is very
fine, and now my closet is so full stored, and so fine, as I would never
desire to have it better. Dined without any strangers with me, which I
do not like on Sundays. Then after dinner by water to Westminster to see
Mrs. Martin, whom I found up in her chamber and ready to go abroad. I
sat there with her and her husband and others a pretty while, and then
away to White Hall, and there walked up and down to the Queen’s side,
and there saw my dear Lady Castlemayne, who continues admirable,
methinks, and I do not hear but that the King is the same to her still
as ever. Anon to chapel, by the King’s closet, and heard a very good
anthemne. Then with Lord Bruncker to Sir W. Coventry’s chamber; and
there we sat with him and talked. He is weary of anything to do, he
says, in the Navy. He tells us this Committee of Accounts will enquire
sharply into our office. And, speaking of Sir J. Minnes, he says he will
not bear any body’s faults but his own. He discoursed as bad of Sir W.
Batten almost, and cries out upon the discipline of the fleete, which is
lost, and that there is not in any of the fourth rates and under scarce
left one Sea Commander, but all young gentlemen; and what troubles
him, he hears that the gentlemen give out that in two or three years a
Tarpaulin shall not dare to look after being better than a Boatswain.
Which he is troubled at, and with good reason, and at this day Sir
Robert Holmes is mighty troubled that his brother do not command in
chief, but is commanded by Captain Hannum, who, Sir W. Coventry says,
he believes to be at least of as good blood, is a longer bred seaman, an
elder officer, and an elder commander, but such is Sir R. Holmes’s pride
as never to be stopt, he being greatly troubled at my Lord Bruncker’s
late discharging all his men and officers but the standing officers at
Chatham, and so are all other Commanders, and a very great cry hath been
to the King from them all in my Lord’s absence. But Sir W. Coventry do
undertake to defend it, and my Lord Bruncker got ground I believe by it,
who is angry at Sir W. Batten’s and Sir W. Pen’s bad words concerning
it, and I have made it worse by telling him that they refuse to sign to
a paper which he and I signed on Saturday to declare the reason of his
actions, which Sir W. Coventry likes and would have it sent him and
he will sign it, which pleases me well. So we parted, and I with Lord
Bruncker to Sir P. Neale’s chamber, and there sat and talked awhile,
Sir Edward Walker being there, and telling us how he hath lost many fine
rowles of antiquity in heraldry by the late fire, but hath saved the
most of his papers. Here was also Dr. Wallis, the famous scholar and
mathematician; but he promises little. Left them, and in the dark and
cold home by water, and so to supper and to read and so to bed, my eyes
being better to-day, and I cannot impute it to anything but by my being
much in the dark to-night, for I plainly find that it is only excess
of light that makes my eyes sore. This after noon I walked with Lord
Bruncker into the Park and there talked of the times, and he do think
that the King sees that he cannot never have much more money or good
from this Parliament, and that therefore he may hereafter dissolve them,
that as soon as he has the money settled he believes a peace will be
clapped up, and that there are overtures of a peace, which if such as
the Lord Chancellor can excuse he will take. For it is the Chancellor’s
interest, he says, to bring peace again, for in peace he can do all and
command all, but in war he cannot, because he understands not the nature
of the war as to the management thereof. He tells me he do not believe
the Duke of York will go to sea again, though there are a great many
about the King that would be glad of any occasion to take him out of
the world, he standing in their ways; and seemed to mean the Duke of
Monmouth, who spends his time the most viciously and idly of any man,
nor will be fit for any thing; yet bespeaks as if it were not impossible
but the King would own him for his son, and that there was a marriage
between his mother and him; which God forbid should be if it be not
true, nor will the Duke of York easily be gulled in it. But this put to
our other distractions makes things appear very sad, and likely to be
the occasion of much confusion in a little time, and my Lord Bruncker
seems to say that nothing can help us but the King’s making a peace soon
as he hath this money; and thereby putting himself out of debt, and
so becoming a good husband, and then he will neither need this nor any
other Parliament, till he can have one to his mind: for no Parliament
can, as he says, be kept long good, but they will spoil one another, and
that therefore it hath been the practice of kings to tell Parliaments
what he hath for them to do, and give them so long time to do it in, and
no longer. Harry Kembe, one of our messengers, is lately dead.