22nd. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and my Lord
Bruncker did show me Hollar’s new print of the City, with a pretty
representation of that part which is burnt, very fine indeed; and tells
me that he was yesterday sworn the King’s servant, and that the King
hath commanded him to go on with his great map of the City, which he was
upon before the City was burned, like Gombout of Paris, which I am
glad of. At noon home to dinner, where my wife and I fell out, I being
displeased with her cutting away a lace handkercher sewed about the neck
down to her breasts almost, out of a belief, but without reason, that it
is the fashion. Here we did give one another the lie too much, but were
presently friends, and then I to my office, where very late and did much
business, and then home, and there find Mr. Batelier, and did sup and
play at cards awhile. But he tells me the newes how the King of France
hath, in defiance to the King of England, caused all his footmen to be
put into vests, and that the noblemen of France will do the like; which,
if true, is the greatest indignity ever done by one Prince to another,
and would incite a stone to be revenged; and I hope our King will, if it
be so, as he tells me it is:

     [Planche throws some doubt on this story in his “Cyclopaedia of
     Costume” (vol. ii., p. 240), and asks the question, “Was Mr.
     Batelier hoaxing the inquisitive secretary, or was it the idle
     gossip of the day, as untrustworthy as such gossip is in general?”
      But the same statement was made by the author of the “Character of a
     Trimmer,” who wrote from actual knowledge of the Court: “About this
     time a general humour, in opposition to France, had made us throw
     off their fashion, and put on vests, that we might look more like a
     distinct people, and not be under the servility of imitation, which
     ever pays a greater deference to the original than is consistent
     with the equality all independent nations should pretend to.  France
     did not like this small beginning of ill humours, at least of
     emulation; and wisely considering, that it is a natural
     introduction, first to make the world their apes, that they may be
     afterwards their slaves.  It was thought, that one of the
     instructions Madame [Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans] brought along
     with her, was to laugh us out of these vests; which she performed so
     effectually, that in a moment, like so many footmen who had quitted
     their master’s livery, we all took it again, and returned to our old
     service; so that the very time of doing it gave a very critical
     advantage to France, since it looked like an evidence of our
     returning to her interest, as well as to their fashion. “The
     Character of a Trimmer” (“Miscellanies by the Marquis of Halifax,”