9th. Up, and then to the office, where we met first since the plague,
which God preserve us in! At noon home to dinner, where uncle Thomas
with me, and in comes Pierce lately come from Oxford, and Ferrers. After
dinner Pierce and I up to my chamber, where he tells me how a great
difference hath been between the Duke and Duchesse, he suspecting her to
be naught with Mr. Sidney.

     [“This Duchess was Chancellor Hyde’s daughter, and she was a very
     handsome woman, and had a great deal of wit; therefore it was not
     without reason that Mr. Sydney, the handsomest youth of his time, of
     the Duke’s bedchamber, was so much in love with her, as appeared to
     us all, and the Duchess not unkind to him, but very innocently.  He
     was afterwards banished the Court for another reason, as was
     reported” (Sir John Reresby’s “Memoirs,” August 5th, 1664, ed.
     Cartwright, pp. 64,65). “‘How could the Duke of York make my mother
     a Papist?’ said the Princess Mary to Dr. Bumet.  ‘The Duke caught a
     man in bed with her,’ said the Doctor, ‘and then had power to make
     her do anything.’  The Prince, who sat by the fire, said, ‘Pray,
     madam, ask the Doctor a few more questions’” (Spence’s “Anecdotes,”
      ed.  Singer, 329).]

But some way or other the matter is made up; but he was banished the
Court, and the Duke for many days did not speak to the Duchesse at all.
He tells me that my Lord Sandwich is lost there at Court, though
the King is particularly his friend. But people do speak every where
slightly of him; which is a sad story to me, but I hope it may be better
again. And that Sir G. Carteret is neglected, and hath great enemies at
work against him. That matters must needs go bad, while all the town,
and every boy in the streete, openly cries, “The King cannot go away
till my Lady Castlemaine be ready to come along with him;” she being
lately put to bed And that he visits her and Mrs. Stewart every morning
before he eats his breakfast. All this put together makes me very sad,
but yet I hope I shall do pretty well among them for all this, by my not
meddling with either of their matters. He and Ferrers gone I paid uncle
Thomas his last quarter’s money, and then comes Mr. Gawden and he and I
talked above stairs together a good while about his business, and to my
great joy got him to declare that of the L500 he did give me the other
day, none of it was for my Treasurershipp for Tangier (I first telling
him how matters stand between Povy and I, that he was to have half of
whatever was coming to me by that office), and that he will gratify me
at 2 per cent. for that when he next receives any money. So there is
L80 due to me more than I thought of. He gone I with a glad heart to
the office to write, my letters and so home to supper and bed, my wife
mighty full of her worke she hath to do in furnishing her bedchamber.