13th. Up, and by coach to St. James’s, and there did our business before
the Duke as usual, having, before the Duke come out of his bed, walked
in an ante-chamber with Sir H. Cholmly, who tells me there are great
jarrs between the Duke of Yorke and the Duke of Albemarle, about the
later’s turning out one or two of the commanders put in by the Duke of
Yorke. Among others, Captain Du Tell, a Frenchman, put in by the Duke
of Yorke, and mightily defended by him; and is therein led by Monsieur
Blancford, that it seems hath the same command over the Duke of Yorke as
Sir W. Coventry hath; which raises ill blood between them. And I do in
several little things observe that Sir W. Coventry hath of late, by the
by, reflected on the Duke of Albemarle and his captains, particularly in
that of old Teddiman, who did deserve to be turned out this fight, and
was so; but I heard Sir W. Coventry say that the Duke of Albemarle put
in one as bad as he is in his room, and one that did as little. After we
had done with the Duke of Yorke, I with others to White Hall, there to
attend again a Committee of Tangier, but there was none, which vexed me
to the heart, and makes me mighty doubtfull that when we have one, it
will be prejudiced against poor Yeabsly and to my great disadvantage
thereby, my Lord Peterborough making it his business, I perceive
(whether in spite to me, whom he cannot but smell to be a friend to
it, or to my Lord Ashly, I know not), to obstruct it, and seems to take
delight in disappointing of us; but I shall be revenged of him. Here
I staid a very great while, almost till noon, and then meeting Balty I
took him with me, and to Westminster to the Exchequer about breaking
of two tallys of L2000 each into smaller tallys, which I have been
endeavouring a good while, but to my trouble it will not, I fear, be
done, though there be no reason against it, but only a little trouble to
the clerks; but it is nothing to me of real profit at all. Thence with
Balty to Hales’s by coach, it being the seventh day from my making my
late oathes, and by them I am at liberty to dispense with any of my
oathes every seventh day after I had for the six days before going
performed all my vowes. Here I find my father’s picture begun, and so
much to my content, that it joys my very heart to thinke that I should
have his picture so well done; who, besides that he is my father, and a
man that loves me, and hath ever done so, is also, at this day, one of
the most carefull and innocent men, in the world. Thence with mighty
content homeward, and in my way at the Stockes did buy a couple of
lobsters, and so home to dinner, where I find my wife and father had
dined, and were going out to Hales’s to sit there, so Balty and I alone
to dinner, and in the middle of my grace, praying for a blessing upon
(these his good creatures), my mind fell upon my lobsters: upon which I
cried, Odd zooks! and Balty looked upon me like a man at a losse what
I meant, thinking at first that I meant only that I had said the grace
after meat instead of that before meat. But then I cried, what is become
of my lobsters? Whereupon he run out of doors to overtake the coach, but
could not, so came back again, and mighty merry at dinner to thinke of
my surprize. After dinner to the Excise Office by appointment, and there
find my Lord Bellasses and the Commissioners, and by and by the whole
company come to dispute the business of our running so far behindhand
there, and did come to a good issue in it, that is to say, to resolve
upon having the debt due to us, and the Household and the Guards
from the Excise stated, and so we shall come to know the worst of our
condition and endeavour for some helpe from my Lord Treasurer. Thence
home, and put off Balty, and so, being invited, to Sir Christopher
Mings’s funeral, but find them gone to church. However I into the church
(which is a fair, large church, and a great chappell) and there heard
the service, and staid till they buried him, and then out. And there
met with Sir W. Coventry (who was there out of great generosity, and no
person of quality there but he) and went with him into his coach, and
being in it with him there happened this extraordinary case, one of
the most romantique that ever I heard of in my life, and could not have
believed, but that I did see it; which was this:--About a dozen able,
lusty, proper men come to the coach-side with tears in their eyes, and
one of them that spoke for the rest begun and says to Sir W. Coventry,
“We are here a dozen of us that have long known and loved, and served
our dead commander, Sir Christopher Mings, and have now done the last
office of laying him in the ground. We would be glad we had any other to
offer after him, and in revenge of him. All we have is our lives; if
you will please to get His Royal Highness to give us a fireship among
us all, here is a dozen of us, out of all which choose you one to be
commander, and the rest of us, whoever he is, will serve him; and, if
possible, do that that shall show our memory of our dead commander, and
our revenge.” Sir W. Coventry was herewith much moved (as well as I, who
could hardly abstain from weeping), and took their names, and so parted;
telling me that he would move His Royal Highness as in a thing very
extraordinary, which was done. Thereon see the next day in this book. So
we parted. The truth is, Sir Christopher Mings was a very stout man, and
a man of great parts, and most excellent tongue among ordinary men; and
as Sir W. Coventry says, could have been the most useful man at such a
pinch of time as this. He was come into great renowne here at home, and
more abroad in the West Indys. He had brought his family into a way of
being great; but dying at this time, his memory and name (his father
being always and at this day a shoemaker, and his mother a Hoyman’s
daughter; of which he was used frequently to boast) will be quite forgot
in a few months as if he had never been, nor any of his name be the
better by it; he having not had time to will any estate, but is dead
poor rather than rich. So we left the church and crowd, and I home
(being set down on Tower Hill), and there did a little business and then
in the evening went down by water to Deptford, it being very late, and
there I staid out as much time as I could, and then took boat again
homeward, but the officers being gone in, returned and walked to Mrs.
Bagwell’s house, and there (it being by this time pretty dark and past
ten o’clock) went into her house and did what I would. But I was not a
little fearfull of what she told me but now, which is, that her servant
was dead of the plague, that her coming to me yesterday was the first
day of her coming forth, and that she had new whitened the house all
below stairs, but that above stairs they are not so fit for me to go up
to, they being not so. So I parted thence, with a very good will, but
very civil, and away to the waterside, and sent for a pint of sacke
and so home, drank what I would and gave the waterman the rest; and so
adieu. Home about twelve at night, and so to bed, finding most of my
people gone to bed. In my way home I called on a fisherman and bought
three eeles, which cost me three shillings.