20th. Up, and to the office; where, among other businesses, Mr. Evelyn’s
proposition about publique Infirmarys was read and agreed on, he being
there: and at noon I took him home to dinner, being desirous of keeping
my acquaintance with him; and a most excellent humoured man I still find
him, and mighty knowing. After dinner I took him by coach to White Hall,
and there he and I parted, and I to my Lord Sandwich’s, where coming
and bolting into the dining-room, I there found Captain Ferrers going
to christen a child of his born yesterday, and I come just pat to be
a godfather, along with my Lord Hinchingbrooke, and Madam Pierce, my
Valentine, which for that reason I was pretty well contented with,
though a little vexed to see myself so beset with people to spend me
money, as she of a Valentine and little Mrs. Tooker, who is come to my
house this day from Greenwich, and will cost me 20s., my wife going out
with her this afternoon, and now this christening. Well, by and by
the child is brought and christened Katharine, and I this day on this
occasion drank a glasse of wine, which I have not professedly done these
two years, I think, but a little in the time of the sicknesse. After
that done, and gone and kissed the mother in bed, I away to Westminster
Hall, and there hear that Mrs. Lane is come to town. So I staid
loitering up and down till anon she comes and agreed to meet at Swayn’s,
and there I went anon, and she come, but staid but little, the place not
being private. I have not seen her since before the plague. So thence
parted and ‘rencontrais a’ her last ‘logis’, and in the place did what I
‘tenais a mind pour ferais con her’. At last she desired to borrow money
of me, L5, and would pawn gold with me for it, which I accepted and
promised in a day or two to supply her. So away home to the office, and
thence home, where little Mrs. Tooker staid all night with us, and a
pretty child she is, and happens to be niece to my beauty that is dead,
that lived at the Jackanapes, in Cheapside. So to bed, a little troubled
that I have been at two houses this afternoon with Mrs. Lane that were
formerly shut up of the plague.