8th. Up, and with Reeves walk as far as the Temple, doing some business
in my way at my bookseller’s and elsewhere, and there parted, and I took
coach, having first discoursed with Mr. Hooke a little, whom we met in
the streete, about the nature of sounds, and he did make me understand
the nature of musicall sounds made by strings, mighty prettily; and told
me that having come to a certain number of vibrations proper to make
any tone, he is able to tell how many strokes a fly makes with her wings
(those flies that hum in their flying) by the note that it answers to
in musique during their flying. That, I suppose, is a little too much
refined; but his discourse in general of sound was mighty fine. There
I left them, and myself by coach to St. James’s, where we attended
with the rest of my fellows on the Duke, whom I found with two or three
patches upon his nose and about his right eye, which come from his being
struck with the bough of a tree the other day in his hunting; and it is
a wonder it did not strike out his eye. After we had done our business
with him, which is now but little, the want of money being such as
leaves us little to do but to answer complaints of the want thereof,
and nothing to offer to the Duke, the representing of our want of money
being now become uselesse, I into the Park, and there I met with Mrs.
Burroughs by appointment, and did agree (after discoursing of some
business of her’s) for her to meet me at New Exchange, while I by coach
to my Lord Treasurer’s, and then called at the New Exchange, and thence
carried her by water to Parliament stayres, and I to the Exchequer about
my Tangier quarter tallys, and that done I took coach and to the west
door of the Abby, where she come to me, and I with her by coach to
Lissen-greene where we were last, and staid an hour or two before dinner
could be got for us, I in the meantime having much pleasure with her,
but all honest. And by and by dinner come up, and then to my sport
again, but still honest; and then took coach and up and down in the
country toward Acton, and then toward Chelsy, and so to Westminster,
and there set her down where I took her up, with mighty pleasure in her
company, and so I by coach home, and thence to Bow, with all the haste
I could, to my Lady Pooly’s, where my wife was with Mr. Batelier and
his sisters, and there I found a noble supper, and every thing exceeding
pleasant, and their mother, Mrs. Batelier, a fine woman, but mighty
passionate upon sudden news brought her of the loss of a dog borrowed of
the Duke of Albemarle’s son to line a bitch of hers that is very pretty,
but the dog was by and by found, and so all well again, their company
mighty innocent and pleasant, we having never been here before. About
ten o’clock we rose from table, and sang a song, and so home in two
coaches (Mr. Batelier and his sister Mary and my wife and I in one, and
Mercer alone in the other); and after being examined at Allgate, whether
we were husbands and wives, home, and being there come, and sent away
Mr. Batelierand his sister, I find Reeves there, it being a mighty fine
bright night, and so upon my leads, though very sleepy, till one in the
morning, looking on the moon and Jupiter, with this twelve-foote glasse
and another of six foote, that he hath brought with him to-night, and
the sights mighty pleasant, and one of the glasses I will buy, it being
very usefull. So to bed mighty sleepy, but with much pleasure. Reeves
lying at my house again; and mighty proud I am (and ought to be
thankfull to God Almighty) that I am able to have a spare bed for my
friends.