May 1st. Up, and all the morning at the office. At noon, my cozen Thomas
Pepys did come to me, to consult about the business of his being a
justice of the Peace, which he is much against; and among other reasons,
tells me, as a confidant, that he is not free to exercise punishment
according to the Act against Quakers and other people, for religion. Nor
do he understand Latin, and so is not capable of the place as formerly,
now all warrants do run in Latin. Nor is he in Kent, though he be of
Deptford parish, his house standing in Surry. However, I did bring him
to incline towards it, if he be pressed to take it. I do think it may be
some repute to me to have my kinsman in Commission there, specially if
he behave himself to content in the country. He gone and my wife gone
abroad, I out also to and fro, to see and be seen, among others to find
out in Thames Streete where Betty Howlett is come to live, being married
to Mrs. Michell’s son; which I did about the Old Swan, but did not think
fit to go thither or see them. Thence by water to Redriffe, reading
a new French book my Lord Bruncker did give me to-day, “L’Histoire
Amoureuse des Gaules,”

     [This book, which has frequently been reprinted, was written by
     Roger de Rabutin, Comte de Bussy, for the amusement of his mistress,
     Madame de Montglas, and consists of sketches of the chief ladies of
     the court, in which he libelled friends and foes alike.  These
     circulated in manuscript, and were printed at Liege in 1665.  Louis
     XIV. was so much annoyed with the book that he sent the author to
     the Bastille for over a year.]

being a pretty libel against the amours of the Court of France. I walked
up and down Deptford yarde, where I had not been since I come from
living at Greenwich, which is some months. There I met with Mr. Castle,
and was forced against my will to have his company back with me. So we
walked and drank at Halfway house and so to his house, where I drank a
cupp of syder, and so home, where I find Mr. Norbury newly come to town
to see us. After he gone my wife tells me the ill newes that our Susan
is sicke and gone to bed, with great pain in her head and back, which
troubles us all. However we to bed expecting what to-morrow would
produce. She hath we conceive wrought a little too much, having neither
maid nor girle to help her.