17th. Up, and busy about public and private business all the morning at
the office. At noon home to dinner, alone with my brother, with whom I
had now the first private talke I have had, and find he hath
preached but twice in his life. I did give him some advice to study
pronunciation; but I do fear he will never make a good speaker, nor, I
fear, any general good scholar, for I do not see that he minds optickes
or mathematiques of any sort, nor anything else that I can find. I know
not what he may be at divinity and ordinary school-learning. However, he
seems sober, and that pleases me. After dinner took him and my wife and
Barker (for so is our new woman called, and is yet but a sorry girle),
and set them down at Unthanke’s, and so to White Hall, and there find
some of my brethren with the Duke of York, but so few I put off the
meeting. So staid and heard the Duke discourse, which he did mighty
scurrilously, of the French, and with reason, that they should give
Beaufort orders when he was to bring, and did bring, his fleete hither,
that his rendezvous for his fleete, and for all sluggs to come to,
should be between Calais and Dover; which did prove the taking of La
Roche[lle], who, among other sluggs behind, did, by their instructions,
make for that place, to rendezvous with the fleete; and Beaufort, seeing
them as he was returning, took them for the English fleete, and wrote
word to the King of France that he had passed by the English fleete, and
the English fleete durst not meddle with him. The Court is all full of
vests, only my Lord St. Albans not pinked but plain black; and they
say the King says the pinking upon white makes them look too much like
magpyes, and therefore hath bespoke one of plain velvet. Thence to
St. James’s by coach, and spoke, at four o’clock or five, with Sir W.
Coventry, newly come from the House, where they have sat all this day
and not come to an end of the debate how the money shall be raised.
He tells me that what I proposed to him the other day was what he had
himself thought on and determined, and that he believes it will speedily
be done--the making Sir J. Minnes a Commissioner, and bringing somebody
else to be Comptroller, and that (which do not please me, I confess, for
my own particulars, so well as Sir J. Minnes) will, I fear, be Sir W.
Pen, for he is the only fit man for it. Away from him and took up my
wife, and left her at Temple Bar to buy some lace for a petticoat, and I
took coach and away to Sir R. Viner’s about a little business, and then
home, and by and by to my chamber, and there late upon making up an
account for the Board to pass to-morrow, if I can get them, for the
clearing all my imprest bills, which if I can do, will be to my very
good satisfaction. Having done this, then to supper and to bed.