4th. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Pen to White Hall in the
latter’s coach, where, when we come, we find the Duke at St. James’s,
whither he is lately gone to lodge. So walking through the Parke we saw
hundreds of people listening at the Gravel-pits,--[Kensington]--and to
and again in the Parke to hear the guns, and I saw a letter, dated last
night, from Strowd, Governor of Dover Castle, which says that the Prince
come thither the night before with his fleete, but that for the guns
which we writ that we heard, it is only a mistake for thunder;

     [Evelyn was in his garden when he heard the guns, and be at once set
     off to Rochester and the coast, but he found that nothing had been
     heard at Deal (see his “Diary,” June 1st, 1666).]

and so far as to yesterday it is a miraculous thing that we all Friday,
and Saturday and yesterday, did hear every where most plainly the guns
go off, and yet at Deale and Dover to last night they did not hear one
word of a fight, nor think they heard one gun. This, added to what I
have set down before the other day about the Katharine, makes room for
a great dispute in philosophy, how we should hear it and they not, the
same wind that brought it to us being the same that should bring it to
them: but so it is. Major Halsey, however (he was sent down on purpose
to hear newes), did bring newes this morning that he did see the Prince
and his fleete at nine of the clock yesterday morning, four or five
leagues to sea behind the Goodwin, so that by the hearing of the guns
this morning we conclude he is come to the fleete. After wayting upon
the Duke, Sir W. Pen (who was commanded to go to-night by water down to
Harwich, to dispatch away all the ships he can) and I home, drinking
two bottles of Cocke ale in the streete in his new fine coach, where no
sooner come, but newes is brought me of a couple of men come to speak
with me from the fleete; so I down, and who should it be but Mr. Daniel,
all muffled up, and his face as black as the chimney, and covered with
dirt, pitch, and tarr, and powder, and muffled with dirty clouts, and
his right eye stopped with okum. He is come last night at five o’clock
from the fleete, with a comrade of his that hath endangered another eye.
They were set on shore at Harwich this morning, and at two o’clock, in
a catch with about twenty more wounded men from the Royall Charles. They
being able to ride, took post about three this morning, and were here
between eleven and twelve. I went presently into the coach with them,
and carried them to Somerset-House-stairs, and there took water (all the
world gazing upon us, and concluding it to be newes from the fleete, and
every body’s face appeared expecting of newes) to the Privy-stairs, and
left them at Mr. Coventry’s lodging (he, though, not being there); and
so I into the Parke to the King, and told him my Lord Generall was well
the last night at five o’clock, and the Prince come with his fleete and
joyned with his about seven. The King was mightily pleased with this
newes, and so took me by the hand and talked a little of it. Giving him
the best account I could; and then he bid me to fetch the two seamen to
him, he walking into the house. So I went and fetched the seamen into
the Vane room to him, and there he heard the whole account.

                                THE FIGHT.

How we found the Dutch fleete at anchor on Friday half seas over,
between Dunkirke and Ostend, and made them let slip their anchors. They
about ninety, and we less than sixty. We fought them, and put them to
the run, till they met with about sixteen sail of fresh ships, and so
bore up again. The fight continued till night, and then again the next
morning from five till seven at night. And so, too, yesterday morning
they begun again, and continued till about four o’clock, they chasing
us for the most part of Saturday and yesterday, we flying from them. The
Duke himself, then those people were put into the catch, and by and by
spied the Prince’s fleete coming, upon which De Ruyter called a little
council (being in chase at this time of us), and thereupon their fleete
divided into two squadrons; forty in one, and about thirty in the other
(the fleete being at first about ninety, but by one accident or other,
supposed to be lessened to about seventy); the bigger to follow the
Duke, the less to meet the Prince. But the Prince come up with the
Generall’s fleete, and the Dutch come together again and bore towards
their own coast, and we with them; and now what the consequence of this
day will be, at that time fighting, we know not. The Duke was forced
to come to anchor on Friday, having lost his sails and rigging. No
particular person spoken of to be hurt but Sir W. Clerke, who hath lost
his leg, and bore it bravely. The Duke himself had a little hurt in his
thigh, but signified little. The King did pull out of his pocket about
twenty pieces in gold, and did give it Daniel for himself and his
companion; and so parted, mightily pleased with the account he did
give him of the fight, and the successe it ended with, of the Prince’s
coming, though it seems the Duke did give way again and again. The King
did give order for care to be had of Mr. Daniel and his companion; and
so we parted from him, and then met the Duke [of York], and gave him the
same account: and so broke up, and I left them going to the surgeon’s
and I myself by water to the ‘Change, and to several people did give
account of the business. So home about four o’clock to dinner, and was
followed by several people to be told the newes, and good newes it is.
God send we may hear a good issue of this day’s business! After I
had eat something I walked to Gresham College, where I heard my Lord
Bruncker was, and there got a promise of the receipt of the fine
varnish, which I shall be glad to have. Thence back with Mr. Hooke to
my house and there lent some of my tables of naval matters, the names
of rigging and the timbers about a ship, in order to Dr. Wilkins’ book
coming out about the Universal Language. Thence, he being gone, to the
Crown, behind the ‘Change, and there supped at the club with my Lord
Bruncker, Sir G. Ent, and others of Gresham College; and all our
discourse is of this fight at sea, and all are doubtful of the successe,
and conclude all had been lost if the Prince had not come in, they
having chased us the greatest part of Saturday and Sunday. Thence with
my Lord Bruncker and Creed by coach to White Hall, where fresh letters
are come from Harwich, where the Gloucester, Captain Clerke, is come in,
and says that on Sunday night upon coming in of the Prince, the Duke did
fly; but all this day they have been fighting; therefore they did face
again, to be sure. Captain Bacon of The Bristoll is killed. They cry
up Jenings of The Ruby, and Saunders of The Sweepstakes. They condemn
mightily Sir Thomas Teddiman for a coward, but with what reason time
must shew. Having heard all this Creed and I walked into the Parke
till 9 or 10 at night, it being fine moonshine, discoursing of the
unhappinesse of our fleete, what it would have been if the Prince
had not come in, how much the Duke hath failed of what he was so
presumptuous of, how little we deserve of God Almighty to give us better
fortune, how much this excuses all that was imputed to my Lord Sandwich,
and how much more he is a man fit to be trusted with all those matters
than those that now command, who act by nor with any advice, but rashly
and without any order. How bad we are at intelligence that should give
the Prince no sooner notice of any thing but let him come to Dover
without notice of any fight, or where the fleete were, or any thing
else, nor give the Duke any notice that he might depend upon the
Prince’s reserve; and lastly, of how good use all may be to checke our
pride and presumption in adventuring upon hazards upon unequal force
against a people that can fight, it seems now, as well as we, and that
will not be discouraged by any losses, but that they will rise again.
Thence by water home, and to supper (my father, wife, and sister having
been at Islington today at Pitt’s) and to bed.