19th. Up, and by coach to my Lord Sandwich’s, but he was gone out. So
I to White Hall, and there waited on the Duke of Yorke with some of the
rest of our brethren, and thence back again to my Lord’s, to see my Lord
Hinchingbroke, which I did, and I am mightily out of countenance in my
great expectation of him by others’ report, though he is indeed a pretty
gentleman, yet nothing what I took him for, methinks, either as to
person or discourse discovered to me, but I must try him more before I
go too far in censuring. Hence to the Exchequer from office to office,
to set my business of my tallys in doing, and there all the morning.
So at noon by coach to St. Paul’s Church-yarde to my Bookseller’s, and
there bespoke a few more books to bring all I have lately bought to L10.
Here I am told for certain, what I have heard once or twice already, of
a Jew in town, that in the name of the rest do offer to give any man L10
to be paid L100, if a certain person now at Smyrna be within these two
years owned by all the Princes of the East, and particularly the grand
Signor as the King of the world, in the same manner we do the King of
England here, and that this man is the true Messiah. One named a friend
of his that had received ten pieces in gold upon this score, and says
that the Jew hath disposed of L1100 in this manner, which is very
strange; and certainly this year of 1666 will be a year of great action;
but what the consequences of it will be, God knows! Thence to the
‘Change, and from my stationer’s thereabouts carried home by coach two
books of Ogilby’s, his AEsop and Coronation, which fell to my lot at his
lottery. Cost me L4 besides the binding. So home. I find my wife gone
out to Hales, her paynter’s, and I after a little dinner do follow her,
and there do find him at worke, and with great content I do see it will
be a very brave picture. Left her there, and I to my Lord Treasurer’s,
where Sir G. Carteret and Sir J. Minnes met me, and before my Lord
Treasurer and Duke of Albemarle the state of our Navy debts were laid
open, being very great, and their want of money to answer them openly
professed, there being but L1,500,000 to answer a certaine expense and
debt of L2,300,000. Thence walked with Fenn down to White Hall, and
there saw the Queene at cards with many ladies, but none of our
beauties were there. But glad I was to see the Queene so well, who looks
prettily; and methinks hath more life than before, since it is confessed
of all that she miscarryed lately; Dr. Clerke telling me yesterday at
White Hall that he had the membranes and other vessels in his hands
which she voided, and were perfect as ever woman’s was that bore a
child. Thence hoping to find my Lord Sandwich, away by coach to my Lord
Chancellor’s, but missed him, and so home and to office, and then to
supper and my Journall, and to bed.