23rd. Being mighty weary last night, lay long this morning, then up and
to the office, where Sir W. Batten, Lord Bruncker and I met, and toward
noon took coach and to White Hall, where I had the opportunity to take
leave of the Prince, and again of the Duke of Albemarle; and saw them
kiss the King’s hands and the Duke’s; and much content, indeed, there
seems to be in all people at their going to sea, and [they] promise
themselves much good from them. This morning the House of Parliament do
meet, only to adjourne again till winter. The plague, I hear, encreases
in the towne much, and exceedingly in the country everywhere. Thence
walked to Westminster Hall, and after a little stay, there being nothing
now left to keep me there, Betty Howlett being gone, I took coach and
away home, in my way asking in two or three places the worth of pearles,
I being now come to the time that I have long ago promised my wife a
necklace. Dined at home and took Balty with me to Hales’s to show him
his sister’s picture, and thence to Westminster, and there I to the Swan
and drank, and so back again alone to Hales’s and there met my wife and
Mercer, Mrs. Pierce being sitting, and two or three idle people of her
acquaintance more standing by. Her picture do come on well. So staid
until she had done and then set her down at home, and my wife and I and
the girle by coach to Islington, and there eat and drank in the coach
and so home, and there find a girle sent at my desire by Mrs. Michell of
Westminster Hall, to be my girle under the cooke-mayde, Susan. But I am
a little dissatisfied that the girle, though young, is taller and bigger
than Su, and will not, I fear, be under her command, which will trouble
me, and the more because she is recommended by a friend that I would not
have any unkindness with, but my wife do like very well of her. So to
my accounts and journall at my chamber, there being bonfires in the
streete, for being St. George’s day, and the King’s Coronation, and the
day of the Prince and Duke’s going to sea. So having done my business,
to bed.