23rd. My father and sister very betimes took their leave; and my wife,
with all possible kindnesse, went with them to the coach, I being
mightily pleased with their company thus long, and my father with his
being here, and it rejoices my heart that I am in condition to do any
thing to comfort him, and could, were it not for my mother, have been
contented he should have stayed always here with me, he is such innocent
company. They being gone, I to my papers, but vexed at what I heard but
a little of this morning, before my wife went out, that Mercer and she
fell out last night, and that the girle is gone home to her mother’s for
all-together: This troubles me, though perhaps it may be an ease to me
of so much charge. But I love the girle, and another we must be forced
to keepe I do foresee and then shall be sorry to part with her. At the
office all the morning, much disquiett in my mind in the middle of my
business about this girle. Home at noon to dinner, and what with the
going away of my father today and the losse of Mercer, I after dinner
went up to my chamber and there could have cried to myself, had not
people come to me about business. In the evening down to Tower Wharfe
thinking to go by water, but could not get watermen; they being now
so scarce, by reason of the great presse; so to the Custome House, and
there, with great threats, got a couple to carry me down to Deptford,
all the way reading Pompey the Great (a play translated from the French
by several noble persons; among others, my Lord Buckhurst), that to me
is but a mean play, and the words and sense not very extraordinary. From
Deptford I walked to Redriffe, and in my way was overtaken by Bagwell,
lately come from sea in the Providence, who did give me an account of
several particulars in the late fight, and how his ship was deserted
basely by the York, Captain Swanly, commander. So I home and there after
writing my letters home to supper and to bed, fully resolved to rise
betimes, and go down the river to-morrow morning, being vexed this night
to find none of the officers in the yarde at 7 at night, nor any body
concerned as if it were a Dutch warr. It seems Mercer’s mother was here
in the morning to speak with my wife, but my wife would not. In the
afternoon I and my wife in writing did instruct W. Hewer in some
discourse to her, and she in the evening did come and satisfy my wife,
and by and by Mercer did come, which I was mighty glad of and eased of
much pain about her.