25th. Up betimes and by water to White Hall, and there with Sir G.
Carteret to Sir W. Coventry, who is come to his winter lodgings at White
Hall, and there agreed upon a method of paying of tickets; and so I
back again home and to the office, where we sate all the morning, but
to little purpose but to receive clamours for money. At noon home to
dinner, where the two Mrs. Daniels come to see us, and dined with us.
After dinner I out with my wife to Mrs. Pierces, where she hath not been
a great while, from some little unkindness of my wife’s to her when she
was last here, but she received us with mighty respect and discretion,
and was making herself mighty fine to go to a great ball to-night at
Court, being the Queene’s birthday; so the ladies for this one day do
wear laces, but to put them off again to-morrow. Thence I to my Lord
Bruncker’s, and with him to Mrs. Williams’s where we met Knipp. I was
glad to see the jade. Made her sing; and she told us they begin at both
houses to act on Monday next. But I fear, after all this sorrow, their
gains will be but little. Mrs. Williams says, the Duke’s house will now
be much the better of the two, because of their women; which I am glad
to hear. Thence with Lord Bruncker to White Hall and there spoke with
Sir W. Coventry about some office business, and then I away to Mrs.
Pierces, and there saw her new closet, which is mighty rich and fine.
Her daughter Betty grows mighty pretty. Thence with my wife home and to
do business at the office. Then to Sir W. Batten’s, who tells me that
the House of Parliament makes mighty little haste in settling the money,
and that he knows not when it will be done; but they fall into faction,
and libells have been found in the House. Among others, one yesterday,
wherein they reckon up divers great sums to be given away by the King,
among others, L10,000 to Sir W. Coventry, for weare and teare (the point
he stood upon to advance that sum by, for them to give the King); Sir G.
Carteret L50,000 for something else, I think supernumerarys; and so to
Matt. Wren L5000 for passing the Canary Company’s patent; and so a great
many other sums to other persons. So home to supper and to bed.