13th. Up, being called up by my wife’s brother, for whom I have got
a commission from the Duke of Yorke for Muster-Master of one of the
divisions, of which Harman is Rere-Admirall, of which I am glad as well
as he. After I had acquainted him with it, and discoursed a little of
it, I went forth and took him with me by coach to the Duke of Albemarle,
who being not up, I took a walk with Balty into the Parke, and to the
Queene’s Chappell, it being Good Friday, where people were all upon
their knees very silent; but, it seems, no masse this day. So back and
waited on the Duke and received some commands of his, and so by coach to
Mr. Hales’s, where it is pretty strange to see that his second doing, I
mean the second time of her sitting, is less like Mrs. Pierce than
the first, and yet I am confident will be most like her, for he is so
curious that I do not see how it is possible for him to mistake. Here
he and I presently resolved of going to White Hall, to spend an houre
in the galleries there among the pictures, and we did so to my great
satisfaction, he shewing me the difference in the payntings, and when I
come more and more to distinguish and observe the workmanship, I do
not find so many good things as I thought there was, but yet great
difference between the works of some and others; and, while my head and
judgment was full of these, I would go back again to his house to
see his pictures, and indeed, though, I think, at first sight some
difference do open, yet very inconsiderably but that I may judge his to
be very good pictures. Here we fell into discourse of my picture, and
I am for his putting out the Landskipp, though he says it is very well
done, yet I do judge it will be best without it, and so it shall be put
out, and be made a plain sky like my wife’s picture, which will be very
noble. Thence called upon an old woman in Pannier Ally to agree for
ruling of some paper for me and she will do it pretty cheap. Here I
found her have a very comely black mayde to her servant, which I liked
very well. So home to dinner and to see my joiner do the bench upon my
leads to my great content. After dinner I abroad to carry paper to my
old woman, and so to Westminster Hall, and there beyond my intention or
design did see and speak with Betty Howlett, at her father’s still, and
it seems they carry her to her own house to begin the world with her
young husband on Monday next, Easter Monday. I please myself with the
thoughts of her neighbourhood, for I love the girl mightily. Thence
home, and thither comes Mr. Houblon and a brother, with whom I evened
for the charter parties of their ships for Tangier, and paid them the
third advance on their freight to full satisfaction, and so, they being
gone, comes Creed and with him till past one in the morning, evening his
accounts till my head aked and I was fit for nothing, however, coming at
last luckily to see through and settle all to my mind, it did please me
mightily, and so with my mind at rest to bed, and he with me and hard to
sleep.