28th (Lord’s day). Up, and to church with my wife, and then home, and
there is come little Michell and his wife, I sent for them, and also
tomes Captain Guy to dine with me, and he and I much talk together. He
cries out of the discipline of the fleete, and confesses really that the
true English valour we talk of is almost spent and worn out; few of
the commanders doing what they should do, and he much fears we shall
therefore be beaten the next year. He assures me we were beaten home the
last June fight, and that the whole fleete was ashamed to hear of our
bonefires. He commends Smith, and cries out of Holmes for an idle,
proud, conceited, though stout fellow. He tells me we are to owe the
losse of so many ships on the sands, not to any fault of the pilots,
but to the weather; but in this I have good authority to fear there was
something more. He says the Dutch do fight in very good order, and we in
none at all. He says that in the July fight, both the Prince and Holmes
had their belly-fulls, and were fain to go aside; though, if the wind
had continued, we had utterly beaten them. He do confess the whole to
be governed by a company of fools, and fears our ruine. After dinner
he gone, I with my brother to White Hall and he to Westminster Abbey. I
presently to Mrs. Martin’s, and there met widow Burroughes and Doll, and
did tumble them all the afternoon as I pleased, and having given them a
bottle of wine I parted and home by boat (my brother going by land), and
thence with my wife to sit and sup with my uncle and aunt Wight, and
see Woolly’s wife, who is a pretty woman, and after supper, being
very merry, in abusing my aunt with Dr. Venner, we home, and I to
do something in my accounts, and so to bed. The Revenge having her
forecastle blown up with powder to the killing of some men in the River,
and the Dyamond’s being overset in the careening at Sheernesse, are
further marks of the method all the King’s work is now done in. The
Foresight also and another come to disasters in the same place this week
in the cleaning; which is strange.