15th. Mighty sleepy; slept till past eight of the clock, and was called
up by a letter from Sir W. Coventry, which, among other things, tells me
how we have burned one hundred and sixty ships of the enemy within the
Fly.

     [On the 8th August the Duke of Albemarle reported to Lord Arlington
     that he had “sent 1000 good men under Sir R. Holmes and Sir William
     Jennings to destroy the islands of Vlie and Schelling.”  On the 10th
     James Hayes wrote to Williamson: “On the 9th at noon smoke was seen
     rising from several places in the island of Vlie, and the 10th
     brought news that Sir Robert had burned in the enemy’s harbour 160
     outward bound valuable merchant men and three men-of-war, and taken
     a little pleasure boat and eight guns in four hours.  The loss is
     computed at a million sterling, and will make great confusion when
     the people see themselves in the power of the English at their very
     doors.  Sir Robert then landed his forces, and is burning the houses
     in Vlie and Schelling as bonfires for his good success at sea”
      (“Calendar of State Papers,” 1666-67, pp. 21,27).]

I up, and with all possible haste, and in pain for fear of coming late,
it being our day of attending the Duke of Yorke, to St. James’s, where
they are full of the particulars; how they are generally good merchant
ships, some of them laden and supposed rich ships. We spent five
fire-ships upon them. We landed on the Schelling (Sir Philip Howard
with some men, and Holmes, I think; with others, about 1000 in all), and
burned a town; and so come away. By and by the Duke of Yorke with his
books showed us the very place and manner, and that it was not our
design or expectation to have done this, but only to have landed on the
Fly, and burned some of their store; but being come in, we spied those
ships, and with our long boats, one by one, fired them, our ships
running all aground, it being so shoal water. We were led to this by, it
seems, a renegado captain of the Hollanders, who found himself ill used
by De Ruyter for his good service, and so come over to us, and hath done
us good service; so that now we trust him, and he himself did go on this
expedition. The service is very great, and our joys as great for it. All
this will make the Duke of Albemarle in repute again, I doubt, though
there is nothing of his in this. But, Lord! to see what successe
do, whether with or without reason, and making a man seem wise,
notwithstanding never so late demonstration of the profoundest folly in
the world. Thence walked over the Parke with Sir W. Coventry, in our way
talking of the unhappy state of our office; and I took an opportunity to
let him know, that though the backwardnesses of all our matters of the
office may be well imputed to the known want of money, yet, perhaps,
there might be personal and particular failings; and that I did,
therefore, depend still upon his promise of telling me whenever he
finds any ground to believe any defect or neglect on my part, which he
promised me still to do; and that there was none he saw, nor, indeed,
says he, is there room now-a-days to find fault with any particular man,
while we are in this condition for money. This, methought, did not so
well please me; but, however, I am glad I have said this, thereby giving
myself good grounds to believe that at this time he did not want an
occasion to have said what he pleased to me, if he had had anything in
his mind, which by his late distance and silence I have feared. But then
again I am to consider he is grown a very great man, much greater than
he was, and so must keep more distance; and, next, that the condition of
our office will not afford me occasion of shewing myself so active
and deserving as heretofore; and, lastly, the muchness of his business
cannot suffer him to mind it, or give him leisure to reflect on
anything, or shew the freedom and kindnesse that he used to do. But I
think I have done something considerable to my satisfaction in doing
this; and that if I do but my duty remarkably from this time forward,
and not neglect it, as I have of late done, and minded my pleasures, I
may be as well as ever I was. Thence to the Exchequer, but did nothing,
they being all gone from their offices; and so to the Old Exchange,
where the towne full of the good newes, but I did not stay to tell or
hear any, but home, my head akeing and drowsy, and to dinner, and then
lay down upon the couch, thinking to get a little rest, but could not.
So down the river, reading “The Adventures of Five Houres,” which the
more I read the more I admire. So down below Greenwich, but the wind
and tide being against us, I back again to Deptford, and did a little
business there, and thence walked to Redriffe; and so home, and to the
office a while. In the evening comes W. Batelier and his sister, and
my wife, and fair Mrs. Turner into the garden, and there we walked, and
then with my Lady Pen and Pegg in a-doors, and eat and were merry, and
so pretty late broke up, and to bed. The guns of the Tower going
off, and there being bonefires also in the street for this late good
successe.