26th (Lord’s day). Up betimes, and to the finishing the setting things
in order in my new closett out of my old, which I did thoroughly by the
time sermon was done at church, to my exceeding joy, only I was a little
disturbed with newes my Lord Bruncker brought me, that we are to attend
the King at White Hall this afternoon, and that it is about a complaint
from the Generalls against us. Sir W. Pen dined by invitation with me,
his Lady and daughter being gone into the country. We very merry. After
dinner we parted, and I to my office, whither I sent for Mr. Lewes and
instructed myself fully in the business of the Victualling, to enable
me to answer in the matter; and then Sir W. Pen and I by coach to White
Hall, and there staid till the King and Cabinet were met in the Green
Chamber, and then we were called in; and there the King begun with me,
to hear how the victualls of the fleete stood. I did in a long discourse
tell him and the rest (the Duke of Yorke, Lord Chancellor, Lord
Treasurer, both the Secretarys, Sir G. Carteret, and Sir W. Coventry,)
how it stood, wherein they seemed satisfied, but press mightily for more
supplies; and the letter of the Generalls, which was read, did lay their
not going or too soon returning from the Dutch coast, this next bout,
to the want of victuals. They then proceeded to the enquiry after the
fireships; and did all very superficially, and without any severity at
all. But, however, I was in pain, after we come out, to know how I had
done; and hear well enough. But, however, it shall be a caution to me to
prepare myself against a day of inquisition. Being come out, I met with
Mr. Moore, and he and I an houre together in the Gallery, telling me
how far they are gone in getting my Lord [Sandwich’s] pardon, so as the
Chancellor is prepared in it; and Sir H. Bennet do promote it, and the
warrant for the King’s signing is drawn. The business between my Lord
Hinchingbroke and Mrs. Mallett is quite broke off; he attending her at
Tunbridge, and she declaring her affections to be settled; and he not
being fully pleased with the vanity and liberty of her carriage. He told
me how my Lord has drawn a bill of exchange from Spayne of L1200, and
would have me supply him with L500 of it, but I avoyded it, being not
willing to embarke myself in money there, where I see things going to
ruine. Thence to discourse of the times; and he tells me he believes
both my Lord Arlington and Sir W. Coventry, as well as my Lord Sandwich
and Sir G. Carteret, have reason to fear, and are afeard of this
Parliament now coming on. He tells me that Bristoll’s faction is getting
ground apace against my Lord Chancellor. He told me that my old Lord
Coventry was a cunning, crafty man, and did make as many bad decrees in
Chancery as any man; and that in one case, that occasioned many years’
dispute, at last when the King come in, it was hoped by the party
grieved, to get my Lord Chancellor to reverse a decree of his. Sir W.
Coventry took the opportunity of the business between the Duke of Yorke
and the Duchesse, and said to my Lord Chancellor, that he had rather be
drawn up Holborne to be hanged, than live to see his father pissed
upon (in these very terms) and any decree of his reversed. And so the
Chancellor did not think fit to do it, but it still stands, to the
undoing of one Norton, a printer, about his right to the printing of the
Bible, and Grammar, &c. Thence Sir W. Pen and I to Islington and there
drank at the Katherine Wheele, and so down the nearest way home, where
there was no kind of pleasure at all. Being come home, hear that Sir J.
Minnes has had a very bad fit all this day, and a hickup do take him,
which is a very bad sign, which troubles me truly. So home to supper a
little and then to bed.