November 1st. Up, and was presented by Burton, one of our smith’s wives,
with a very noble cake, which I presently resolved to have my wife go
with to-day, and some wine, and house-warme my Betty Michell, which
she readily resolved to do. So I to the office and sat all the morning,
where little to do but answer people about want of money; so that there
is little service done the King by us, and great disquiet to ourselves;
I am sure there is to me very much, for I do not enjoy myself as I would
and should do in my employment if my pains could do the King better
service, and with the peace that we used to do it. At noon to dinner,
and from dinner my wife and my brother, and W. Hewer and Barker away to
Betty Michell’s, to Shadwell, and I to my office, where I took in Mrs.
Bagwell and did what I would with her, and so she went away, and I all
the afternoon till almost night there, and then, my wife being come
back, I took her and set her at her brother’s, who is very sicke, and I
to White Hall, and there all alone a pretty while with Sir W. Coventry
at his chamber. I find him very melancholy under the same considerations
of the King’s service that I am. He confesses with me he expects all
will be undone, and all ruined; he complains and sees perfectly what I
with grief do, and said it first himself to me that all discipline is
lost in the fleete, no order nor no command, and concurs with me that
it is necessary we do again and again represent all things more and more
plainly to the Duke of York, for a guard to ourselves hereafter when
things shall come to be worse. He says the House goes on slowly in
finding of money, and that the discontented party do say they have
not done with us, for they will have a further bout with us as to our
accounts, and they are exceedingly well instructed where to hit us. I
left him with a thousand sad reflections upon the times, and the state
of the King’s matters, and so away, and took up my wife and home, where
a little at the office, and then home to supper, and talk with my wife
(with whom I have much comfort) and my brother, and so to bed.