26th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon dined at
home: Mr. Hunt and his wife, who is very gallant, and newly come from
Cambridge, because of the sicknesse, with us. Very merry at table, and
the people I do love mightily, but being in haste to go to White Hall
I rose, and Mr. Hunt with me, and by coach thither, where I left him in
the boarded gallery, and I by appointment to attend the Duke of Yorke
at his closett, but being not come, Sir G. Carteret and I did talke
together, and [he] advises me, that, if I could, I would get the papers
of examination touching the business of the last year’s prizes, which
concern my Lord Sandwich, out of Warcupp’s hands, who being now under
disgrace and poor, he believes may be brought easily to part with them.
My Lord Crew, it seems, is fearfull yet that maters may be enquired
into. This I will endeavour to do, though I do not thinke it signifies
much. By and by the Duke of Yorke comes and we had a meeting and,
among other things, I did read my declaration of the proceedings of the
Victualling hired this yeare, and desired his Royall Highnesse to give
me the satisfaction of knowing whether his Royall Highnesse were pleased
therewith. He told me he was, and that it was a good account, and that
the business of the Victualling was much in a better condition than it
was the last yeare; which did much joy me, being said in the company of
my fellows, by which I shall be able with confidence to demand my salary
and the rest of the subsurveyors. Thence away mightily satisfied to Mrs.
Pierces, there to find my wife. Mrs. Pierce hath lain in of a boy about
a month. The boy is dead this day. She lies in good state, and very
pretty she is, but methinks do every day grow more and more great, and a
little too much, unless they get more money than I fear they do. Thence
with my wife and Mercer to my Lord Chancellor’s new house, and there
carried them up to the leads, where I find my Lord Chamberlain,
Lauderdale, Sir Robert Murray, and others, and do find it the most
delightfull place for prospect that ever was in the world, and even
ravishing me, and that is all, in short, I can say of it. Thence to
Islington to our old house and eat and drank, and so round by Kingsland
home, and there to the office a little and Sir W. Batten’s, but no newes
at all from the fleete, and so home to bed.