10th (Lord’s day). Up very betimes, and down the river to Deptford,
and did a good deale of business in sending away and directing several
things to the Fleete. That being done, back to London to my office, and
there at my office till after Church time fitting some notes to carry to
Sir W. Coventry in the afternoon. At noon home to dinner, where my cozen
Joyces, both of them, they and their wives and little Will, come by
invitation to dinner to me, and I had a good dinner for them; but, Lord!
how sicke was I of W. Joyce’s company, both the impertinencies of it and
his ill manners before me at my table to his wife, which I could hardly
forbear taking notice of; but being at my table and for his wife’s sake,
I did, though I will prevent his giving me the like occasion again at
my house I will warrant him. After dinner I took leave and by water to
White Hall, and there spent all the afternoon in the Gallery, till the
Council was up, to speake with Sir W. Coventry. Walking here I met with
Pierce the surgeon, who is lately come from the fleete, and tells me
that all the commanders, officers, and even the common seamen do condemn
every part of the late conduct of the Duke of Albemarle: both in his
fighting at all, in his manner of fighting, running among them in his
retreat, and running the ships on ground; so as nothing can be worse
spoken of. That Holmes, Spragg, and Smith do all the business, and the
old and wiser commanders nothing. So as Sir Thomas Teddiman (whom the
King and all the world speak well of) is mightily discontented, as being
wholly slighted. He says we lost more after the Prince come, than before
too. The Prince was so maimed, as to be forced to be towed home. He says
all the fleete confess their being chased home by the Dutch; and yet the
body of the Dutch that did it, was not above forty sayle at most. And
yet this put us into the fright, as to bring all our ships on ground. He
says, however, that the Duke of Albemarle is as high almost as ever,
and pleases himself to think that he hath given the Dutch their bellies
full, without sense of what he hath lost us; and talks how he knows now
the way to beat them. But he says, that even Smith himself, one of his
creatures, did himself condemn the late conduct from the beginning to
the end. He tells me further, how the Duke of Yorke is wholly given up
to his new mistresse, my Lady Denham, going at noon-day with all his
gentlemen with him to visit her in Scotland Yard; she declaring she will
not be his mistresse, as Mrs. Price, to go up and down the Privy-stairs,
but will be owned publicly; and so she is. Mr. Bruncker, it seems, was
the pimp to bring it about, and my Lady Castlemaine, who designs thereby
to fortify herself by the Duke; there being a falling-out the other
day between the King and her: on this occasion, the Queene, in ordinary
talke before the ladies in her drawing-room, did say to my Lady
Castlemaine that she feared the King did take cold, by staying so late
abroad at her house. She answered before them all, that he did not stay
so late abroad with her, for he went betimes thence (though he do not
before one, two, or three in the morning), but must stay somewhere else.
The King then coming in and overhearing, did whisper in the eare aside,
and told her she was a bold impertinent woman, and bid her to be gone
out of the Court, and not come again till he sent for, her; which she
did presently, and went to a lodging in the Pell Mell, and kept there
two or three days, and then sent to the King to know whether she might
send for her things away out of her house. The King sent to her, she
must first come and view them: and so she come, and the King went to
her, and all friends again. He tells me she did, in her anger, say she
would be even with the King, and print his letters to her. So putting
all together, we are and are like to be in a sad condition. We are
endeavouring to raise money by borrowing it of the City; but I do not
think the City will lend a farthing. By and by the Council broke up, and
I spoke with Sir W. Coventry about business, with whom I doubt not in a
little time to be mighty well, when I shall appear to mind my business
again as I used to do, which by the grace of God I will do. Gone from
him I endeavoured to find out Sir G. Carteret, and at last did at Mr.
Ashburnham’s, in the Old Palace Yarde, and thence he and I stepped
out and walked an houre in the church-yarde, under Henry the Seventh’s
Chappell, he being lately come from the fleete; and tells me, as I hear
from every body else, that the management in the late fight was bad from
top to bottom. That several said this would not have been if my Lord
Sandwich had had the ordering of it. Nay, he tells me that certainly had
my Lord Sandwich had the misfortune to have done as they have done, the
King could not have saved him. There is, too, nothing but discontent
among the officers; and all the old experienced men are slighted. He
tells me to my question (but as a great secret), that the dividing of
the fleete did proceed first from a proposition from the fleete,
though agreed to hence. But he confesses it arose from want of due
intelligence, which he confesses we do want. He do, however, call the
fleete’s retreat on Sunday a very honourable retreat, and that the Duke
of Albemarle did do well in it, and would have been well if he had done
it sooner, rather than venture the loss of the fleete and crown, as he
must have done if the Prince had not come. He was surprised when I told
him I heard that the King did intend to borrow some money of the City,
and would know who had spoke of it to me; I told him Sir Ellis Layton
this afternoon. He says it is a dangerous discourse; for that the City
certainly will not be invited to do it, and then for the King to ask it
and be denied, will be the beginning of our sorrow. He seems to fear we
shall all fall to pieces among ourselves. This evening we hear that Sir
Christopher Mings is dead of his late wounds; and Sir W. Coventry did
commend him to me in a most extraordinary manner. But this day, after
three days’ trial in vain, and the hazard of the spoiling of the ship
in lying till next spring, besides the disgrace of it, newes is brought
that the Loyall London is launched at Deptford. Having talked thus much
with Sir G. Carteret we parted there, and I home by water, taking in
my boat with me young Michell and my Betty his wife, meeting them
accidentally going to look a boat. I set them down at the Old Swan and
myself, went through bridge to the Tower, and so home, and after supper
to bed.