5th. I with my Lord Bruncker and Mrs. Williams by coach with four horses
to London, to my Lord’s house in Covent-Guarden. But, Lord! what staring
to see a nobleman’s coach come to town. And porters every where bow to
us; and such begging of beggars! And a delightfull thing it is to see
the towne full of people again as now it is; and shops begin to open,
though in many places seven or eight together, and more, all shut; but
yet the towne is full, compared with what it used to be. I mean the City
end; for Covent-Guarden and Westminster are yet very empty of people, no
Court nor gentry being there. Set Mrs. Williams down at my Lord’s house
and he and I to Sir G. Carteret, at his chamber at White Hall, he being
come to town last night to stay one day. So my Lord and he and I much
talke about the Act, what credit we find upon it, but no private talke
between him and I. So I to the ‘Change, and there met Mr. Povy, newly
come to town, and he and I to Sir George Smith’s and there dined nobly.
He tells me how my Lord Bellases complains for want of money and of
him and me therein, but I value it not, for I know I do all that can
be done. We had no time to talk of particulars, but leave it to another
day, and I away to Cornhill to expect my Lord Bruncker’s coming back
again, and I staid at my stationer’s house, and by and by comes my Lord,
and did take me up and so to Greenwich, and after sitting with them a
while at their house, home, thinking to get Mrs. Knipp, but could not,
she being busy with company, but sent me a pleasant letter, writing
herself “Barbary Allen.” I went therefore to Mr. Boreman’s for pastime,
and there staid an houre or two talking with him, and reading a
discourse about the River of Thames, the reason of its being choked up
in several places with shelfes; which is plain is, by the encroachments
made upon the River, and running out of causeways into the River at
every wood-wharfe; which was not heretofore when Westminster Hall and
White Hall were built, and Redriffe Church, which now are sometimes
overflown with water. I had great satisfaction herein. So home and to my
papers for lacke of company, but by and by comes little Mrs. Tooker and
sat and supped with me, and I kept her very late talking and making her
comb my head, and did what I will with her. So late to bed.