7th. At the office all the morning, at noon dined at home and Creed
with me, and after dinner he and I two or three hours in my chamber
discoursing of the fittest way for a man to do that hath money, and find
all he offers of turning some into gold and leaving some in a friend’s
hand is nothing more than what I thought of myself, but is doubtful,
as well as I, what is best to be done of all these or other ways to be
thought on. He tells me he finds all things mighty dull at Court; and
that they now begin to lie long in bed; it being, as we suppose, not
seemly for them to be found playing and gaming as they used to be; nor
that their minds are at ease enough to follow those sports, and yet not
knowing how to employ themselves (though there be work enough for their
thoughts and councils and pains), they keep long in bed. But he thinks
with me, that there is nothing in the world can helpe us but the King’s
personal looking after his business and his officers, and that with that
we may yet do well; but otherwise must be undone: nobody at this day
taking care of any thing, nor hath any body to call him to account for
it. Thence left him and to my office all the afternoon busy, and in some
pain in my back by some bruise or other I have given myself in my right
testicle this morning, and the pain lies there and hath done, and in
my back thereupon all this day. At night into the garden to my wife and
Lady Pen and Pegg, and Creed, who staid with them till to at night. My
Lady Pen did give us a tarte and other things, and so broke up late and
I to bed. It proved the hottest night that ever I was in in my life, and
thundered and lightened all night long and rained hard. But, Lord!
to see in what fears I lay a good while, hearing of a little noise of
somebody walking in the house: so rung the bell, and it was my mayds
going to bed about one o’clock in the morning. But the fear of being
robbed, having so much money in the house, was very great, and is still
so, and do much disquiet me.