30th. Up and to my office, there to settle some business in order.to our
waiting on the Duke to-day. That done to White Hall to Sir W. Coventry’s
chamber, where I find the Duke gone out with the King to-day on hunting.
So after some discourse with him, I by water to Westminster, and there
drew a draught of an order for my Lord Treasurer to sign for my having
some little tallys made me in lieu of two great ones, of L2000 each, to
enable me to pay small sums therewith. I shewed it to Sir R. Long and
had his approbation, and so to Sir Ph. Warwicke’s, and did give it him
to get signed. So home to my office, and there did business. By and by
toward noon word is brought me that my father and my sister are come. I
expected them to-day, but not so soon. I to them, and am heartily glad
to see them, especially my father, who, poor man, looks very well, and
hath rode up this journey on horseback very well, only his eyesight and
hearing is very bad. I staid and dined with them, my wife being gone by
coach to Barnet, with W. Hewer and Mercer, to meet them, and they did
come Ware way. After dinner I left them to dress themselves and I abroad
by appointment to my Lord Ashly, who, it is strange to see, how prettily
he dissembles his favour to Yeabsly’s business, which none in the world
could mistrust only I, that am privy to his being bribed. Thence
to White Hall, and there staid till the Council was up, with Creed
expecting a meeting of Tangier to end Yeabsly’s business, but we could
not procure it. So I to my Lord Treasurer’s and got my warrant, and
then to Lovett’s, but find nothing done there. So home and did a little
business at the office, and so down by water to Deptford and back again
home late, and having signed some papers and given order in business,
home, where my wife is come home, and so to supper with my father, and
mighty pleasant we were, and my wife mighty kind to him and Pall, and
so after supper to bed, myself being sleepy, and my right eye still very
sore, as it has been now about five days or six, which puts me out of
tune. To-night my wife tells me newes has been brought her that Balty’s
wife is brought to bed, by some fall or fit, before her time, of a great
child but dead. If the woman do well we have no reason to be sorry,
because his staying a little longer without a child will be better for
him and her.