31st. Good friends in the morning and up to the office, where sitting
all the morning, and while at table we were mightily joyed with newes
brought by Sir J. Minnes and Sir W. Batten of the death of De Ruyter,
but when Sir W. Coventry come, he told us there was no such thing, which
quite dashed me again, though, God forgive me! I was a little sorry in
my heart before lest it might give occasion of too much glory to the
Duke of Albemarle. Great bandying this day between Sir W. Coventry and
my Lord Bruncker about Captain Cocke, which I am well pleased with,
while I keepe from any open relyance on either side, but rather on Sir
W. Coventry’s. At noon had a haunch of venison boiled and a very good
dinner besides, there dining with me on a sudden invitation the two
mayden sisters, Bateliers, and their elder brother, a pretty man,
understanding and well discoursed, much pleased with his company.
Having dined myself I rose to go to a Committee of Tangier, and did
come thither time enough to meet Povy and Creed and none else. The Court
being empty, the King being gone to Tunbridge, and the Duke of Yorke
a-hunting. I had some discourse with Povy, who is mightily discontented,
I find, about his disappointments at Court; and says, of all places,
if there be hell, it is here. No faith, no truth, no love, nor any
agreement between man and wife, nor friends. He would have spoke
broader, but I put it off to another time; and so parted. Then with
Creed and read over with him the narrative of the late [fight], which he
makes a very poor thing of, as it is indeed, and speaks most
slightingly of the whole matter. Povy discoursed with me about my Lord
Peterborough’s L50 which his man did give me from him, the last year’s
salary I paid him, which he would have Povy pay him again; but I have
not taken it to myself yet, and therefore will most heartily return him,
and mark him out for a coxcomb. Povy went down to Mr. Williamson’s, and
brought me up this extract out of the Flanders’ letters to-day come:
That Admiral Everson, and the Admiral and Vice-Admiral of Freezeland,
with many captains and men, are slain; that De Ruyter is safe, but lost