14th. Up, and very well again of my pain in my back, it having been
nothing but cold. By coach to White Hall, seeing many smokes of the fire
by the way yet, and took up into the coach with me a country gentleman,
who asked me room to go with me, it being dirty--one come out of the
North to see his son, after the burning his house: a merchant. Here
endeavoured to wait on the Duke of York, but he would not stay from the
Parliament. So I to Westminster Hall, and there met my good friend Mr.
Evelyn, and walked with him a good while, lamenting our condition
for want of good council, and the King’s minding of his business and
servants. I out to the Bell Taverne, and thither comes Doll to me....,
and after an hour’s stay, away and staid in Westminster Hall till the
rising of the house, having told Mr. Evelyn, and he several others, of
my Gazette which I had about me that mentioned in April last a plot
for which several were condemned of treason at the Old Bayly for many
things, and among others for a design of burning the city on the 3rd
of September. The house sat till three o’clock, and then up: and I home
with Sir Stephen Fox to his house to dinner, and the Cofferer with us.
There I find Sir S. Fox’s lady, a fine woman, and seven the prettiest
children of theirs that ever I knew almost. A very genteel dinner, and
in great state and fashion, and excellent discourse; and nothing like an
old experienced man and a courtier, and such is the Cofferer Ashburnham.
The House have been mighty hot to-day against the Paper Bill, showing
all manner of averseness to give the King money; which these courtiers
do take mighty notice of, and look upon the others as bad rebells as
ever the last were. But the courtiers did carry it against those men
upon a division of the House, a great many, that it should be committed;
and so it was: which they reckon good news. After dinner we three to
the Excise Office, and there had long discourse about our monies, but
nothing to satisfaction, that is, to shew any way of shortening the time
which our tallies take up before they become payable, which is now full
two years, which is 20 per, cent. for all the King’s money for interest,
and the great disservice of his Majesty otherwise. Thence in the evening
round by coach home, where I find Foundes his present, of a fair pair of
candlesticks, and half a dozen of plates come, which cost him full L50,
and is a very good present; and here I met with, sealed up, from Sir H.
Cholmly, the lampoone, or the Mocke-Advice to a Paynter,

     [In a broadside (1680), quoted by Mr. G. T. Drury in his edition of
     Waller’s Poems, 1893, satirical reference is made to the fashionable
     form of advice to the painters

               “Each puny brother of the rhyming trade
               At every turn implores the Painter’s aid,
               And fondly enamoured of own foul brat
               Cries in an ecstacy, Paint this, draw that.”

     The series was continued, for we find “Advice to a Painter upon the
     Defeat of the Rebels in the West and the Execution of the late Duke
     of Monmouth” (“Poems on Affairs of State,” vol. ii., p. 148);
     “Advice to a Painter, being a Satire on the French King,” &c., 1692,
     and “Advice to a Painter,” 1697 (“Poems on Affairs of State,” vol.
     ii., p. 428).]

abusing the Duke of York and my Lord Sandwich, Pen, and every body, and
the King himself, in all the matters of the navy and warr. I am sorry
for my Lord Sandwich’s having so great a part in it. Then to supper and
musique, and to bed.