7th. Up by five o’clock; and, blessed be God! find all well, and by
water to Paul’s Wharfe. Walked thence, and saw, all the towne burned,
and a miserable sight of Paul’s church; with all the roofs fallen,
and the body of the quire fallen into St. Fayth’s; Paul’s school also,
Ludgate, and Fleet-street, my father’s house, and the church, and a
good part of the Temple the like. So to Creed’s lodging, near the
New Exchange, and there find him laid down upon a bed; the house all
unfurnished, there being fears of the fire’s coming to them. There
borrowed a shirt of him, and washed. To Sir W. Coventry, at St. James’s,
who lay without curtains, having removed all his goods; as the King at
White Hall, and every body had done, and was doing. He hopes we shall
have no publique distractions upon this fire, which is what every body
fears, because of the talke of the French having a hand in it. And it is
a proper time for discontents; but all men’s minds are full of care to
protect themselves, and save their goods: the militia is in armes every
where. Our fleetes, he tells me, have been in sight one of another, and
most unhappily by fowle weather were parted, to our great losse, as in
reason they do conclude; the Dutch being come out only to make a
shew, and please their people; but in very bad condition as to stores;
victuals, and men. They are at Bullen; and our fleete come to St.
Ellen’s. We have got nothing, but have lost one ship, but he knows not
what. Thence to the Swan, and there drank: and so home, and find all
well. My Lord Bruncker, at Sir W. Batten’s, and tells us the Generall
is sent for up, to come to advise with the King about business at this
juncture, and to keep all quiet; which is great honour to him, but I am
sure is but a piece of dissimulation. So home, and did give orders for
my house to be made clean; and then down to Woolwich, and there find all
well: Dined, and Mrs. Markham come to see my wife. So I up again, and
calling at Deptford for some things of W. Hewer’s, he being with me, and
then home and spent the evening with Sir R. Ford, Mr. Knightly, and Sir
W. Pen at Sir W. Batten’s: This day our Merchants first met at Gresham
College, which, by proclamation, is to be their Exchange. Strange to
hear what is bid for houses all up and down here; a friend of Sir W.
Rider’s: having L150 for what he used to let for L40 per annum. Much
dispute where the Custome-house shall be thereby the growth of the City
again to be foreseen. My Lord Treasurer, they say, and others; would
have it at the other end of the towne. I home late to Sir W. Pen’s, who
did give me a bed; but without curtains or hangings, all being down. So
here I went the first time into a naked bed, only my drawers on; and did
sleep pretty well: but still hath sleeping and waking had a fear of fire
in my heart, that I took little rest. People do all the world over
cry out of the simplicity of my Lord Mayor in generall; and more
particularly in this business of the fire, laying it all upon’ him. A
proclamation

     [On September 5th proclamation was made “ordering that for supply of
     the distressed people left destitute by the late dreadful and dismal
     fire....  great proportions of bread be brought daily, not
     only to the former markets, but to those lately ordained; that all
     churches, chapels, schools, and public buildings are to be open to
     receive the goods of those who know not how to dispose of them.” On