3rd. Waked betimes, mightily troubled in mind, and in the most true
trouble that I ever was in my life, saving in the business last year
of the East India prizes. So up, and with Mr. Hater and W. Hewer and
Griffin to consider of our business, and books and papers necessary
for this examination; and by and by, by eight o’clock, comes Birch, the
first, with the lists and books of accounts delivered in. He calls me to
work, and there he and I begun, when, by and by, comes Garraway,

     [William Garway, elected M.P. for Chichester, March 26th, 1661, and
     in 1674 he was appointed by the House to confer with Lord
     Shaftesbury respecting the charge against Pepys being popishly
     affected.  See note to the Life, vol. i., p, xxxii, and for his
     character, October 6th, 1666]

the first time I ever saw him, and Sir W. Thompson and Mr. Boscawen.
They to it, and I did make shift to answer them better than I expected.
Sir W. Batten, Lord Bruncker, [Sir] W. Pen, come in, but presently went
out; and [Sir] J. Minnes come in, and said two or three words from the
purpose, but to do hurt; and so away he went also, and left me all the
morning with them alone to stand or fall. At noon Sir W. Batten comes
to them to invite them (though fast day) to dinner, which they did,
and good company they were, but especially Garraway. Here I have news
brought me of my father’s coming to town, and I presently to him, glad
to see him, poor man, he being come to town unexpectedly to see us and
the city. I could not stay with him, but after dinner to work again,
only the Committee and I, till dark night, and by that time they cast
up all the lists, and found out what the medium of men was borne all
the war, of all sorts, and ended with good peace, and much seeming
satisfaction; but I find them wise and reserved, and instructed to hit
all our blots, as among others, that we reckon the ships full manned
from the beginning. They gone, and my heart eased of a great deale of
fear and pain, and reckoning myself to come off with victory, because
not overcome in anything or much foiled, I away to Sir W. Coventry’s
chamber, but he not within, then to White Hall, and there among the
ladies, and saw my Lady Castlemaine never looked so ill, nor Mrs.
Stewart neither, as in this plain, natural dress. I was not pleased with
either of them. Away, not finding [Sir] W. Coventry, and so home, and
there find my father and my brother come to towne--my father without my
expectation; but glad I am to see him. And so to supper with him, and to
work again at the office; then home, to set up all my folio books, which
are come home gilt on the backs, very handsome to the eye, and then at
midnight to bed. This night [Sir] W. Pen told me [Sir] W. Batten swears
he will have nothing to do with the Privateer if his son do not go
Lieutenant, which angers me and him; but we will be even with him, one
way or other.