29th. Up betimes, and there to fit some Tangier accounts, and then, by
appointment, to my Lord Bellasses, but about Paul’s thought of the chant
paper I should carry with me, and so fain to come back again, and did,
and then met with Sir W. Pen, and with him to my Lord Bellasses, he
sitting in the coach the while, while I up to my Lord and there offered
him my account of the bills of exchange I had received and paid for him,
wherein we agree all but one L200 bill of Vernatty’s drawing, wherein I
doubt he hath endeavoured to cheate my Lord; but that will soon appear.
Thence took leave, and found Sir W. Pen talking to Orange Moll, of the
King’s house, who, to our great comfort, told us that they begun to act
on the 18th of this month. So on to St. James’s, in the way Sir W. Pen
telling me that Mr. Norton, that married Sir J. Lawson’s daughter, is
dead. She left L800 a year jointure, a son to inherit the whole estate.
She freed from her father-in-law’s tyranny, and is in condition to helpe
her mother, who needs it; of which I am glad, the young lady being very
pretty. To St. James’s, and there Sir W. Coventry took Sir W. Pen and
me apart, and read to us his answer to the Generalls’ letter to the King
that he read last night; wherein he is very plain, and states the matter
in full defence of himself and of me with him, which he could not avoid;
which is a good comfort to me, that I happen to be involved with him in
the same cause. And then, speaking of the supplies which have been made
to this fleete, more than ever in all kinds to any, even that wherein
the Duke of Yorke himself was, “Well,” says he, “if this will not do, I
will say, as Sir J. Falstaffe did to the Prince, ‘Tell your father, that
if he do not like this let him kill the next Piercy himself,’”--[“King
Henry IV.,” Part I, act v., sc. 4.]--and so we broke up, and to the
Duke, and there did our usual business. So I to the Parke and there met
Creed, and he and I walked to Westminster to the Exchequer, and thence
to White Hall talking of Tangier matters and Vernatty’s knavery, and so
parted, and then I homeward and met Mr. Povy in Cheapside, and stopped
and talked a good while upon the profits of the place which my Lord
Bellasses hath made this last year, and what share we are to have of
it, but of this all imperfect, and so parted, and I home, and there find
Mrs. Mary Batelier, and she dined with us; and thence I took them to
Islington, and there eat a custard; and so back to Moorfields, and
shewed Batelier, with my wife, “Polichinello,” which I like the more I
see it; and so home with great content, she being a mighty good-natured,
pretty woman, and thence I to the Victualling office, and there with Mr.
Lewes and Willson upon our Victualling matters till ten at night, and so
I home and there late writing a letter to Sir W. Coventry, and so home
to supper and to bed. No newes where the Dutch are. We begin to think
they will steale through the Channel to meet Beaufort. We think our
fleete sayled yesterday, but we have no newes of it.