25th (Lord’s day). Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to White Hall,
and there coming late, I to rights to the chapel, where in my usual
place I heard one of the King’s chaplains, one Mr. Floyd, preach. He was
out two or three times in his prayer, and as many in his sermon, but yet
he made a most excellent good sermon, of our duty to imitate the
lives and practice of Christ and the saints departed, and did it very
handsomely and excellent stile; but was a little overlarge in magnifying
the graces of the nobility and prelates, that we have seen in our
memorys in the world, whom God hath taken from us. At the end of
the sermon an excellent anthem; but it was a pleasant thing, an
idle companion in our pew, a prating, bold counsellor that hath been
heretofore at the Navy Office, and noted for a great eater and drinker,
not for quantity, but of the best, his name Tom Bales, said, “I know a
fitter anthem for this sermon,” speaking only of our duty of following
the saints, and I know not what. “Cooke should have sung, ‘Come, follow,
follow me.’” I After sermon up into the gallery, and then to Sir G.
Carteret’s to dinner; where much company. Among others, Mr. Carteret and
my Lady Jemimah, and here was also Mr. [John] Ashburnham, the great man,
who is a pleasant man, and that hath seen much of the world, and more
of the Court. After dinner Sir G. Carteret and I to another room, and he
tells me more and more of our want of money and in how ill condition
we are likely to be soon in, and that he believes we shall not have a
fleete at sea the next year. So do I believe; but he seems to speak
it as a thing expected by the King and as if their matters were laid
accordingly. Thence into the Court and there delivered copies of my
report to my Lord Treasurer, to the Duke of York, Sir W. Coventry, and
others, and attended there till the Council met, and then was called
in, and I read my letter. My Lord Treasurer declared that the King had
nothing to give till the Parliament did give him some money. So the King
did of himself bid me to declare to all that would take our tallys for
payment, that he should, soon as the Parliament’s money do come in, take
back their tallys, and give them money: which I giving him occasion to
repeat to me, it coming from him against the ‘gre’

     [Apparently a translation of the French ‘contre le gre’, and
     presumably an expression in common use.  “Against the grain” is
     generally supposed to have its origin in the use of a plane against
     the grain of the wood.]

I perceive, of my Lord Treasurer, I was content therewith, and went
out, and glad that I have got so much. Here staid till the Council
rose, walking in the gallery. All the talke being of Scotland, where
the highest report, I perceive, runs but upon three or four hundred in
armes; but they believe that it will grow more, and do seem to apprehend
it much, as if the King of France had a hand in it. My Lord Lauderdale
do make nothing of it, it seems, and people do censure him for it, he
from the beginning saying that there was nothing in it, whereas it do
appear to be a pure rebellion; but no persons of quality being in it,
all do hope that it cannot amount to much. Here I saw Mrs. Stewart this
afternoon, methought the beautifullest creature that ever I saw in my
life, more than ever I thought her so, often as I have seen her; and I
begin to think do exceed my Lady Castlemayne, at least now. This being
St. Catherine’s day, the Queene was at masse by seven o’clock this
morning; and. Mr. Ashburnham do say that he never saw any one have so
much zeale in his life as she hath: and, the question being asked by my
Lady Carteret, much beyond the bigotry that ever the old Queen-mother
had. I spoke with Mr. Maya who tells me that the design of building the
City do go on apace, and by his description it will be mighty handsome,
and to the satisfaction of the people; but I pray God it come not out
too late. The Council up, after speaking with Sir W. Coventry a little,
away home with Captain Cocke in his coach, discourse about the forming
of his contract he made with us lately for hempe, and so home, where we
parted, and I find my uncle Wight and Mrs. Wight and Woolly, who staid
and supped, and mighty merry together, and then I to my chamber to even
my journal, and then to bed. I will remember that Mr. Ashburnham
to-day at dinner told how the rich fortune Mrs. Mallett reports of her
servants; that my Lord Herbert would have had her; my Lord Hinchingbroke
was indifferent to have her;

     [They had quarrelled (see August 26th).  She, perhaps, was piqued at
     Lord Hinchingbroke’s refusal “to compass the thing without consent
     of friends” (see February 25th), whence her expression,
     “indifferent” to have her.  It is worthy of remark that their
     children intermarried; Lord Hinchingbroke’s son married Lady
     Rochester’s daughter.--B.]

my Lord John Butler might not have her; my Lord of Rochester would have
forced her;

     [Of the lady thus sought after, whom Pepys calls “a beauty” as well
     as a fortune, and who shortly afterwards, about the 4th February,