15th. This [morning] come Mr. Shepley (newly out of the country) to see
me; after a little discourse with him, I to the office, where we sat
all the morning, and at noon home, and there dined, Shepley with me, and
after dinner I did pay him L70, which he had paid my father for my use
in the country. He being gone, I took coach and to Mrs. Pierce’s, where
I find her as fine as possible, and himself going to the ball at night
at Court, it being the Queen’s birth-day, and so I carried them in my
coach, and having set them into the house, and gotten Mr. Pierce to
undertake the carrying in my wife, I to Unthanke’s, where she appointed
to be, and there told her, and back again about business to White Hall,
while Pierce went and fetched her and carried her in. I, after I had met
with Sir W. Coventry and given him some account of matters, I also to
the ball, and with much ado got up to the loft, where with much trouble
I could see very well. Anon the house grew full, and the candles light,
and the King and Queen and all the ladies set: and it was, indeed, a
glorious sight to see Mrs. Stewart in black and white lace, and her head
and shoulders dressed with dyamonds, and the like a great many great
ladies more, only the Queen none; and the King in his rich vest of some
rich silke and silver trimming, as the Duke of York and all the dancers
were, some of cloth of silver, and others of other sorts, exceeding
rich. Presently after the King was come in, he took the Queene, and
about fourteen more couple there was, and began the Bransles. As many
of the men as I can remember presently, were, the King, Duke of York,
Prince Rupert, Duke of Monmouth, Duke of Buckingham, Lord Douglas,’ Mr.
[George] Hamilton, Colonell Russell, Mr. Griffith, Lord Ossory, Lord
Rochester; and of the ladies, the Queene, Duchess of York, Mrs.
Stewart, Duchess of Monmouth, Lady Essex Howard, Mrs. Temples Swedes
Embassadress, Lady Arlington; Lord George Barkeley’s daughter, and
many others I remember not; but all most excellently dressed in rich
petticoats and gowns, and dyamonds, and pearls. After the Bransles, then
to a Corant, and now and then a French dance; but that so rare that the
Corants grew tiresome, that I wished it done. Only Mrs. Stewart danced
mighty finely, and many French dances, specially one the King called
the New Dance, which was very pretty; but upon the whole matter, the
business of the dancing of itself was not extraordinary pleasing. But
the clothes and sight of the persons was indeed very pleasing, and worth
my coming, being never likely to see more gallantry while I live, if I
should come twenty times. About twelve at night it broke up, and I to
hire a coach with much difficulty, but Pierce had hired a chair for my
wife, and so she being gone to his house, he and I, taking up Barker at
Unthanke’s, to his house, whither his wife was come home a good while
ago and gone to bed. So away home with my wife, between displeased with
the dull dancing, and satisfied at the clothes and persons. My Lady
Castlemayne, without whom all is nothing, being there, very rich, though
not dancing. And so after supper, it being very cold, to bed.