8th. Up, and before I went to the office I spoke with Mr. Martin for his
advice about my proceeding in the business of the private man-of-war,
he having heretofore served in one of them, and now I have it in my
thoughts to send him purser in ours. After this discourse I to the
office, where I sat all the morning, Sir W. Coventry with us, where he
hath not been a great while, Sir W. Pen also, newly come from the Nore,
where he hath been some time fitting of the ships out. At noon home
to dinner and then to the office awhile, and so home for my sword,
and there find Mercer come to see her mistresse. I was glad to see her
there, and my wife mighty kind also, and for my part, much vexed that
the jade is not with us still. Left them together, designing to go
abroad to-morrow night to Mrs. Pierces to dance; and so I to Westminster
Hall, and there met Mr. Grey, who tells me the House is sitting still
(and now it was six o’clock), and likely to sit till midnight; and have
proceeded fair to give the King his supply presently; and herein
have done more to-day than was hoped for. So to White Hall to Sir W.
Coventry, and there would fain have carried Captain Cocke’s business for
his bargain of hemp, but am defeated and disappointed, and know hardly
how to carry myself in it between my interest and desire not to offend
Sir W. Coventry. Sir W. Coventry did this night tell me how the business
is about Sir J. Minnes; that he is to be a Commissioner, and my Lord
Bruncker and Sir W. Pen are to be Controller joyntly, which I am very
glad of, and better than if they were either of them alone; and do
hope truly that the King’s business will be better done thereby, and
infinitely better than now it is. Thence by coach home, full of thoughts
of the consequence of this alteration in our office, and I think no evil
to me. So at my office late, and then home to supper and to bed. Mr.
Grey did assure me this night, that he was told this day, by one of the
greater Ministers of State in England, and one of the King’s Cabinet,
that we had little left to agree on between the Dutch and us towards a
peace, but only the place of treaty; which do astonish me to hear, but
I am glad of it, for I fear the consequence of the war. But he says that
the King, having all the money he is like to have, we shall be sure of a
peace in a little time.