9th. Up and to the office, where did a good deale of business, and then
at noon to the Exchange and to my little goldsmith’s, whose wife is very
pretty and modest, that ever I saw any. Upon the ‘Change, where I seldom
have of late been, I find all people mightily at a losse what to expect,
but confusion and fears in every man’s head and heart. Whether war or
peace, all fear the event will be bad. Thence home and with my brother
to dinner, my wife being dressing herself against night; after dinner
I to my closett all the afternoon, till the porter brought my vest back
from the taylor’s, and then to dress myself very fine, about 4 or 5
o’clock, and by that time comes Mr. Batelier and Mercer, and away by
coach to Mrs. Pierces, by appointment, where we find good company: a
fair lady, my Lady Prettyman, Mrs. Corbet, Knipp; and for men, Captain
Downing, Mr. Lloyd, Sir W. Coventry’s clerk, and one Mr. Tripp, who
dances well. After some trifling discourse, we to dancing, and very good
sport, and mightily pleased I was with the company. After our first bout
of dancing, Knipp and I to sing, and Mercer and Captain Downing (who
loves and understands musique) would by all means have my song of
“Beauty, retire.” which Knipp had spread abroad; and he extols it above
any thing he ever heard, and, without flattery, I know it is good in its
kind. This being done and going to dance again, comes news that White
Hall was on fire; and presently more particulars, that the Horse-guard
was on fire;

     [“Nov. 9th.  Between seven and eight at night, there happened a fire
     in the Horse Guard House, in the Tilt Yard, over against Whitehall,
     which at first arising, it is supposed, from some snuff of a candle
     falling amongst the straw, broke out with so sudden a flame, that at
     once it seized the north-west part of that building; but being so
     close under His Majesty’s own eye, it was, by the timely help His
     Majesty and His Royal Highness caused to be applied, immediately
     stopped, and by ten o’clock wholly mastered, with the loss only of
     that part of the building it had at first seized.”--The London
     Gazette, No. 103.--B.]

and so we run up to the garret, and find it so; a horrid great fire; and
by and by we saw and heard part of it blown up with powder. The ladies
begun presently to be afeard: one fell into fits. The whole town in
an alarme. Drums beat and trumpets, and the guards every where
spread, running up and down in the street. And I begun to have mighty
apprehensions how things might be at home, and so was in mighty pain
to get home, and that that encreased all is that we are in expectation,
from common fame, this night, or to-morrow, to have a massacre, by the
having so many fires one after another, as that in the City, and at
same time begun in Westminster, by the Palace, but put out; and since
in Southwarke, to the burning down some houses; and now this do make all
people conclude there is something extraordinary in it; but nobody knows
what. By and by comes news that the fire has slackened; so then we were
a little cheered up again, and to supper, and pretty merry. But, above
all, there comes in the dumb boy that I knew in Oliver’s time, who is
mightily acquainted here, and with Downing; and he made strange signs of
the fire, and how the King was abroad, and many things they understood,
but I could not, which I wondering at, and discoursing with Downing
about it, “Why,” says he, “it is only a little use, and you will
understand him, and make him understand you with as much ease as may
be.” So I prayed him to tell him that I was afeard that my coach would
be gone, and that he should go down and steal one of the seats out of
the coach and keep it, and that would make the coachman to stay. He did
this, so that the dumb boy did go down, and, like a cunning rogue, went
into the coach, pretending to sleep; and, by and by, fell to his work,
but finds the seats nailed to the coach. So he did all he could, but
could not do it; however, stayed there, and stayed the coach till the
coachman’s patience was quite spent, and beat the dumb boy by force, and
so went away. So the dumb boy come up and told him all the story,
which they below did see all that passed, and knew it to be true. After
supper, another dance or two, and then newes that the fire is as great
as ever, which put us all to our wit’s-end; and I mightily [anxious] to
go home, but the coach being gone, and it being about ten at night, and
rainy dirty weather, I knew not what to do; but to walk out with Mr.
Batelier, myself resolving to go home on foot, and leave the women
there. And so did; but at the Savoy got a coach, and come back and took
up the women; and so, having, by people come from the fire, understood
that the fire was overcome, and all well, we merrily parted, and home.
Stopped by several guards and constables quite through the town, round
the wall, as we went, all being in armes. We got well home ....
Being come home, we to cards, till two in the morning, and drinking
lamb’s-wool.

     [A beverage consisting of ale mixed with sugar, nutmeg, and the pulp
     of roasted apples.  “A cupp of lamb’s-wool they dranke unto him
     then.”  The King and the Miller of Mansfield (Percy’s “Reliques,”
      Series III., book ii., No. 20).]

So to bed.