24th. Sunday. Midsummer Day. Up, but, being weary the last night, not so
soon as I intended. Then being dressed, down by water to Deptford, and
there did a great deale of business, being in a mighty hurry, Sir W.
Coventry writing to me that there was some thoughts that the Dutch
fleete were out or coming out. Business being done in providing for the
carrying down of some provisions to the fleete, I away back home and
after dinner by water to White Hall, and there waited till the councill
rose, in the boarded gallery, and there among other things I hear that
Sir Francis Prujean is dead, after being married to a widow about a
yeare or thereabouts. He died very rich, and had, for the last yeare,
lived very handsomely, his lady bringing him to it. He was no great
painstaker in person, yet died very rich; and, as Dr. Clerke says, was
of a very great judgment, but hath writ nothing to leave his name to
posterity. In the gallery among others met with Major Halsey, a great
creature of the Duke of Albemarle’s; who tells me that the Duke, by
name, hath said that he expected to have the worke here up in the River
done, having left Sir W. Batten and Mr. Phipps there. He says that the
Duke of Albemarle do say that this is a victory we have had, having,
as he was sure, killed them 8000 men, and sunk about fourteen of their
ships; but nothing like this appears true. He lays much of the little
success we had, however, upon the fleete’s being divided by order
from above, and the want of spirit in the commanders; and that he was
commanded by order to go out of the Downes to the Gun-fleete, and in
the way meeting the Dutch fleete, what should he do? should he not fight
them? especially having beat them heretofore at as great disadvantage.
He tells me further, that having been downe with the Duke of Albemarle,
he finds that Holmes and Spragge do govern most business of the Navy;
and by others I understand that Sir Thomas Allen is offended thereat;
that he is not so much advised with as he ought to be. He tells me also,
as he says, of his own knowledge, that several people before the Duke
went out did offer to supply the King with L100,000 provided he would be
treasurer of it, to see it laid out for the Navy; which he refused, and
so it died. But I believe none of this. This day I saw my Lady Falmouth,
with whom I remember now I have dined at my Lord Barkeley’s heretofore,
a pretty woman: she was now in her second or third mourning, and pretty
pleasant in her looks. By and by the Council rises, and Sir W. Coventry
comes out; and he and I went aside, and discoursed of much business of
the Navy; and afterwards took his coach, and to Hide-Parke, he and I
alone: there we had much talke. First, he started a discourse of a talke
he hears about the towne, which, says he, is a very bad one, and fit to
be suppressed, if we knew how which is, the comparing of the successe
of the last year with that of this; saying that that was good, and that
bad. I was as sparing in speaking as I could, being jealous of him and
myself also, but wished it could be stopped; but said I doubted it could
not otherwise than by the fleete’s being abroad again, and so finding
other worke for men’s minds and discourse. Then to discourse of himself,
saying, that he heard that he was under the lash of people’s discourse
about the Prince’s not having notice of the Dutch being out, and for him
to comeback again, nor the Duke of Albemarle notice that the Prince was
sent for back again: to which he told me very particularly how careful
he was the very same night that it was resolved to send for the Prince
back, to cause orders to be writ, and waked the Duke, who was then in
bed, to sign them; and that they went by expresse that very night, being
the Wednesday night before the fight, which begun on the Friday; and
that for sending them by the post expresse, and not by gentlemen on
purpose, he made a sport of it, and said, I knew of none to send it
with, but would at least have lost more time in fitting themselves out,
than any diligence of theirs beyond that of the ordinary post would have
recovered. I told him that this was not so much the towne talke as the
reason of dividing the fleete. To this he told me he ought not to say
much; but did assure me in general that the proposition did first come
from the fleete, and the resolution not being prosecuted with orders
so soon as the Generall thought fit, the Generall did send Sir Edward
Spragge up on purpose for them; and that there was nothing in the whole
business which was not done with the full consent and advice of the Duke
of Albemarle.

But he did adde (as the Catholiques call ‘le secret de la Masse’), that
Sir Edward Spragge--who had even in Sir Christopher Mings’s time put in
to be the great favourite of the Prince, but much more now had a mind to
be the great man with him, and to that end had a mind to have the Prince
at a distance from the Duke of Albemarle, that they might be doing
something alone--did, as he believed, put on this business of dividing
the fleete, and that thence it came.

     [This division of the fleet was the original cause of the disaster,
     and at a later period the enemies of Clarendon charged him with
     having advised this action, but Coventry’s communication to Pepys in
     the text completely exonerates Clarendon.]

He tells me as to the business of intelligence, the want whereof the
world did complain much of, that for that it was not his business,
and as he was therefore to have no share in the blame, so he would
not meddle to lay it any where else. That de Ruyter was ordered by the
States not to make it his business to come into much danger, but to
preserve himself as much as was fit out of harm’s way, to be able to
direct the fleete. He do, I perceive, with some violence, forbear saying
any thing to the reproach of the Duke of Albemarle; but, contrarily,
speaks much of his courage; but I do as plainly see that he do not like
the Duke of Albemarle’s proceedings, but, contrarily, is displeased
therewith. And he do plainly diminish the commanders put in by the Duke,
and do lessen the miscarriages of any that have been removed by him. He
concurs with me, that the next bout will be a fatal one to one side or
other, because, if we be beaten, we shall not be able to set out our
fleete again. He do confess with me that the hearts of our seamen are
much saddened; and for that reason, among others, wishes Sir Christopher
Mings was alive, who might inspire courage and spirit into them.
Speaking of Holmes, how great a man he is, and that he do for the
present, and hath done all the voyage, kept himself in good order and
within bounds; but, says he, a cat will be a cat still, and some time
or other out his humour must break again. He do not disowne but that the
dividing of the fleete upon the presumptions that were then had (which,
I suppose, was the French fleete being come this way), was a good
resolution. Having had all this discourse, he and I back to White Hall;
and there I left him, being [in] a little doubt whether I had behaved
myself in my discourse with the policy and circumspection which ought to
be used to so great a courtier as he is, and so wise and factious a man,
and by water home, and so, after supper, to bed.