14th. (Thanksgiving day.)

     [A proclamation ordering August 14th to be observed in London and
     Westminster, and August 23rd in other places, as a day of
     thanksgiving for the late victory at sea over the Dutch, was
     published on August 6th.]

Up, and comes Mr. Foley and his man, with a box of a great variety
of carpenter’s and joyner’s tooles, which I had bespoke, to me, which
please me mightily; but I will have more. Then I abroad down to the Old
Swan, and there I called and kissed Betty Michell, and would have got
her to go with me to Westminster, but I find her a little colder than
she used to be, methought, which did a little molest me. So I away not
pleased, and to White Hall, where I find them at Chappell, and met with
Povy, and he and I together, who tells me how mad my letter makes my
Lord Peterborough, and what a furious letter he hath writ to me in
answer, though it is not come yet. This did trouble me; for though there
be no reason, yet to have a nobleman’s mouth open against a man may do a
man hurt; so I endeavoured to have found him out and spoke with him,
but could not. So to the chappell, and heard a piece of the Dean of
Westminster’s sermon, and a special good anthemne before the king, after
a sermon, and then home by coach with Captain Cocke, who is in pain
about his hempe, of which he says he hath bought great quantities, and
would gladly be upon good terms with us for it, wherein I promise to
assist him. So we ‘light at the ‘Change, where, after a small turn or
two, taking no pleasure now-a-days to be there, because of answering
questions that would be asked there which I cannot answer; so home and
dined, and after dinner, with my wife and Mercer to the Beare-garden,

     [The Bear Garden was situated on Bankside, close to the precinct of
     the Clinke Liberty, and very near to the old palace of the bishops
     of Winchester.  Stow, to his “Survey,” says: “There be two Bear
     Gardens, the old and new Places.”  The name still exists in a street
     or lane at the foot of Southwark Bridge, and in Bear Garden Wharf.]

where I have not been, I think, of many years, and saw some good sport
of the bull’s tossing of the dogs: one into the very boxes. But it is
a very rude and nasty pleasure. We had a great many hectors in the same
box with us (and one very fine went into the pit, and played his dog for
a wager, which was a strange sport for a gentleman), where they drank
wine, and drank Mercer’s health first, which I pledged with my hat off;
and who should be in the house but Mr. Pierce the surgeon, who saw us
and spoke to us. Thence home, well enough satisfied, however, with the
variety of this afternoon’s exercise; and so I to my chamber, till in
the evening our company come to supper. We had invited to a venison
pasty Mr. Batelier and his sister Mary, Mrs. Mercer, her daughter Anne,
Mr. Le Brun, and W. Hewer; and so we supped, and very merry. And then
about nine o’clock to Mrs. Mercer’s gate, where the fire and boys
expected us, and her son had provided abundance of serpents and rockets;
and there mighty merry (my Lady Pen and Pegg going thither with us, and
Nan Wright), till about twelve at night, flinging our fireworks,
and burning one another and the people over the way. And at last our
businesses being most spent, we into Mrs. Mercer’s, and there mighty
merry, smutting one another with candle grease and soot, till most of
us were like devils. And that being done, then we broke up, and to my
house; and there I made them drink, and upstairs we went, and then fell
into dancing (W. Batelier dancing well), and dressing, him and I and one
Mr. Banister (who with his wife come over also with us) like women; and
Mercer put on a suit of Tom’s, like a boy, and mighty mirth we had, and
Mercer danced a jigg; and Nan Wright and my wife and Pegg Pen put on
perriwigs. Thus we spent till three or four in the morning, mighty
merry; and then parted, and to bed.