24th. Up, and to the office, where Lord Bruncker, [Sir] J. Mimics, [Sir]
W. Yen, and myself met, and there I did use my notes I took on Saturday
night about tickets, and did come to a good settlement in the business
of that office, if it be kept to, this morning being a meeting on
purpose. At noon to prevent my Lord Bruncker’s dining here I walked as
if upon business with him, it being frost and dry, as far as Paul’s,
and so back again through the City by Guildhall, observing the ruines
thereabouts, till I did truly lose myself, and so home to dinner. I do
truly find that I have overwrought my eyes, so that now they are become
weak and apt to be tired, and all excess of light makes them sore, so
that now to the candlelight I am forced to sit by, adding, the snow
upon the ground all day, my eyes are very bad, and will be worse if not
helped, so my Lord Bruncker do advise as a certain cure to use greene
spectacles, which I will do. So to dinner, where Mercer with us, and
very merry. After dinner she goes and fetches a little son of Mr.
Backeworth’s, the wittiest child and of the most spirit that ever I saw
in my life for discourse of all kind, and so ready and to the purpose,
not above four years old. Thence to Sir Robert Viner’s, and there paid
for the plate I have bought to the value of L94, with the L100 Captain
Cocke did give me to that purpose, and received the rest in money. I
this evening did buy me a pair of green spectacles, to see whether
they will help my eyes or no. So to the ‘Change, and went to the Upper
‘Change, which is almost as good as the old one; only shops are but on
one side. Then home to the office, and did business till my eyes began
to be bad, and so home to supper. My people busy making mince pies, and
so to bed. No newes yet of our Gottenburgh fleete; which makes [us] have
some fears, it being of mighty concernment to have our supply of masts
safe. I met with Mr. Cade to-night, my stationer; and he tells me that
he hears for certain that the Queene-Mother is about and hath near
finished a peace with France, which, as a Presbyterian, he do not like,
but seems to fear it will be a means to introduce Popery.