5th (A holyday). Lay long; then up, and to the office, where vexed to
meet with people come from the fleete at the Nore, where so many ships
are laid up and few going abroad, and yet Sir Thomas Allen hath sent up
some Lieutenants with warrants to presse men for a few ships to go out
this winter, while every day thousands appear here, to our great trouble
and affright, before our office and the ticket office, and no Captains
able to command one-man aboard. Thence by water to Westminster, and
there at the Swan find Sarah is married to a shoemaker yesterday, so
I could not see her, but I believe I shall hereafter at good leisure.
Thence by coach to my Lady Peterborough, and there spoke with my Lady,
who had sent to speak with me. She makes mighty moan of the badness of
the times, and her family as to money. My Lord’s passionateness for want
thereof, and his want of coming in of rents, and no wages from the
Duke of York. No money to be had there for wages nor disbursements, and
therefore prays my assistance about his pension. I was moved with her
story, which she largely and handsomely told me, and promised I would
try what I could do in a few days, and so took leave, being willing to
keep her Lord fair with me, both for his respect to my Lord Sandwich and
for my owne sake hereafter, when I come to pass my accounts. Thence to
my Lord Crew’s, and there dined, and mightily made of, having not, to my
shame, been there in 8 months before. Here my Lord and Sir Thomas Crew,
Mr. John, and Dr. Crew, and two strangers. The best family in the world
for goodness and sobriety. Here beyond my expectation I met my Lord
Hinchingbroke, who is come to towne two days since from Hinchingbroke,
and brought his sister and brother Carteret with him, who are at Sir G.
Carteret’s. After dinner I and Sir Thomas Crew went aside to discourse
of public matters, and do find by him that all the country gentlemen are
publickly jealous of the courtiers in the Parliament, and that they do
doubt every thing that they propose; and that the true reason why the
country gentlemen are for a land-tax and against a general excise, is,
because they are fearful that if the latter be granted they shall never
get it down again; whereas the land-tax will be but for so much; and
when the war ceases, there will be no ground got by the Court to keep
it up. He do much cry out upon our accounts, and that all that they have
had from the King hath been but estimates both from my Lord Treasurer
and us, and from all people else, so that the Parliament is weary of
it. He says the House would be very glad to get something against Sir
G. Carteret, and will not let their inquiries die till they have got
something. He do, from what he hath heard at the Committee for examining
the burning of the City, conclude it as a thing certain that it was done
by plots; it being proved by many witnesses that endeavours were made in
several places to encrease the fire, and that both in City and country
it was bragged by several Papists that upon such a day or in such a time
we should find the hottest weather that ever was in England, and words
of plainer sense. But my Lord Crew was discoursing at table how the
judges have determined in the case whether the landlords or the tenants
(who are, in their leases, all of them generally tied to maintain and
uphold their houses) shall bear the losse of the fire; and they say that
tenants should against all casualties of fire beginning either in their
owne or in their neighbour’s; but, where it is done by an enemy, they
are not to do it. And this was by an enemy, there having been one
convicted and hanged upon this very score. This is an excellent salvo
for the tenants, and for which I am glad, because of my father’s house.
After dinner and this discourse I took coach, and at the same time find
my Lord Hinchingbroke and Mr. John Crew and the Doctor going out to see
the ruins of the City; so I took the Doctor into my hackney coach (and
he is a very fine sober gentleman), and so through the City. But,
Lord! what pretty and sober observations he made of the City and its
desolation; till anon we come to my house, and there I took them upon
Tower Hill to shew them what houses were pulled down there since the
fire; and then to my house, where I treated them with good wine of
several sorts, and they took it mighty respectfully, and a fine
company of gentlemen they are; but above all I was glad to see my Lord
Hinchingbroke drink no wine at all. Here I got them to appoint Wednesday
come se’nnight to dine here at my house, and so we broke up and all took
coach again, and I carried the Doctor to Chancery Lane, and thence I to
White Hall, where I staid walking up and down till night, and then got
almost into the play house, having much mind to go and see the play
at Court this night; but fearing how I should get home, because of the
bonefires and the lateness of the night to get a coach, I did not stay;
but having this evening seen my Lady Jemimah, who is come to towne,
and looks very well and fat, and heard how Mr. John Pickering is to be
married this week, and to a fortune with L5000, and seen a rich necklace
of pearle and two pendants of dyamonds, which Sir G. Carteret hath
presented her with since her coming to towne, I home by coach, but met
not one bonefire through the whole town in going round by the wall,
which is strange, and speaks the melancholy disposition of the City at
present, while never more was said of, and feared of, and done against
the Papists than just at this time. Home, and there find my wife and her
people at cards, and I to my chamber, and there late, and so to supper
and to bed.