18th. Up in good case, and so by coach to St. James’s after my fellows,
and there did our business, which is mostly every day to complain of
want of money, and that only will undo us in a little time. Here, among
other things, before us all, the Duke of Yorke did say, that now at
length he is come to a sure knowledge that the Dutch did lose in the
late engagements twenty-nine captains and thirteen ships. Upon which Sir
W. Coventry did publickly move, that if his Royal Highness had this of
a certainty, it would be of use to send this down to the fleete, and
to cause it to be spread about the fleete, for the recovering of the
spirits of the officers and seamen; who are under great dejectedness
for want of knowing that they did do any thing against the enemy,
notwithstanding all that they did to us. Which, though it be true, yet
methought was one of the most dishonourable motions to our countrymen
that ever was made; and is worth remembering. Thence with Sir W. Pen
home, calling at Lilly’s, to have a time appointed when to be drawn
among the other Commanders of Flags the last year’s fight. And so full
of work Lilly is, that he was faro to take his table-book out to see
how his time is appointed, and appointed six days hence for him to come
between seven and eight in the morning. Thence with him home; and there
by appointment I find Dr. Fuller, now Bishop of Limericke, in Ireland;
whom I knew in his low condition at Twittenham. I had also by his desire
Sir W. Pen, and with him his lady and daughter, and had a good dinner,
and find the Bishop the same good man as ever; and in a word, kind to
us, and, methinks, one of the comeliest and most becoming prelates
in all respects that ever I saw in my life. During dinner comes an
acquaintance of his, Sir Thomas Littleton; whom I knew not while he was
in my house, but liked his discourse; and afterwards, by Sir W. Pen,
do come to know that he is one of the greatest speakers in the House of
Commons, and the usual second to the great Vaughan. So was sorry I did
observe him no more, and gain more of his acquaintance. After dinner,
they being gone, and I mightily pleased with my guests, I down the river
to Greenwich, about business, and thence walked to Woolwich, reading
“The Rivall Ladys” all the way, and find it a most pleasant and fine
writ play. At Woolwich saw Mr. Shelden, it being late, and there eat and
drank, being kindly used by him and Bab, and so by water to Deptford,
it being 10 o’clock before I got to Deptford, and dark, and there to
Bagwell’s, and, having staid there a while, away home, and after supper
to bed. The Duke of Yorke said this day that by the letters from the
Generals they would sail with the Fleete this day or to-morrow.