8th. Up very betimes and to attend the Duke of York by order, all of
us to report to him what the works are that are required of us and to
divide among us, wherein I have taken a very good share, and more than
I can perform, I doubt. Thence to the Exchequer about some Tangier
businesses, and then home, where to my very great joy I find Balty come
home without any hurt, after the utmost imaginable danger he hath gone
through in the Henery, being upon the quarterdeck with Harman all the
time; and for which service Harman I heard this day commended most
seriously and most eminently by the Duke of Yorke. As also the Duke
did do most utmost right to Sir Thomas Teddiman, of whom a scandal was
raised, but without cause, he having behaved himself most eminently
brave all the whole fight, and to extraordinary great service and
purpose, having given Trump himself such a broadside as was hardly
ever given to any ship. Mings is shot through the face, and into the
shoulder, where the bullet is lodged. Young Holmes’ is also ill wounded,
and Ather in The Rupert. Balty tells me the case of The Henery; and it
was, indeed, most extraordinary sad and desperate. After dinner Balty
and I to my office, and there talked a great deal of this fight; and I
am mightily pleased in him and have great content in, and hopes of his
doing well. Thence out to White Hall to a Committee for Tangier, but
it met not. But, Lord! to see how melancholy the Court is, under the
thoughts of this last overthrow (for so it is), instead of a victory,
so much and so unreasonably expected. Thence, the Committee not meeting,
Creed and I down the river as low as Sir W. Warren’s, with whom I
did motion a business that may be of profit to me, about buying some
lighters to send down to the fleete, wherein he will assist me. So back
again, he and I talking of the late ill management of this fight, and
of the ill management of fighting at all against so great a force
bigger than ours, and so to the office, where we parted, but with this
satisfaction that we hear the Swiftsure, Sir W. Barkeley, is come in
safe to the Nore, after her being absent ever since the beginning of
the fight, wherein she did not appear at all from beginning to end. But
wherever she has been, they say she is arrived there well, which I pray
God however may be true. At the office late, doing business, and so home
to supper and to bed.