5th. (Lord’s day). Up, and down to the Old Swan, and there called Betty
Michell and her husband, and had two or three a long salutes from her
out of sight of ‘su mari’, which pleased me mightily, and so carried
them by water to West minster, and I to St. James’s, and there had a
meeting before the Duke of Yorke, complaining of want of money, but
nothing done to any purpose, for want we shall, so that now our advices
to him signify nothing. Here Sir W. Coventry did acquaint the Duke of
Yorke how the world do discourse of the ill method of our books, and
that we would consider how to answer any enquiry which shall be made
after our practice therein, which will I think concern the Controller
most, but I shall make it a memento to myself. Thence walked to the
Parish Church to have one look upon Betty Michell, and so away homeward
by water, and landed to go to the church, where, I believe, Mrs.
Horsely goes, by Merchant-tailors’ Hall, and there I find in the pulpit
Elborough, my old schoolfellow and a simple rogue, and yet I find him
preaching a very good sermon, and in as right a parson-like manner, and
in good manner too, as I have heard any body; and the church very full,
which is a surprising consideration; but I did not see her. So home, and
had a good dinner, and after dinner with my wife, and Mercer, and Jane
by water, all the afternoon up as high as Morclaeke with great pleasure,
and a fine day, reading over the second part of the “Siege of Rhodes,”
 with great delight. We landed and walked at Barne-elmes, and then at the
Neat Houses I landed and bought a millon,--[melon]--and we did also
land and eat and drink at Wandsworth, and so to the Old Swan, and thence
walked home. It being a mighty fine cool evening, and there being come,
my wife and I spent an houre in the garden, talking of our living in
the country, when I shall be turned out of the office, as I fear the
Parliament may find faults enough with the office to remove us all, and
I am joyed to think in how good a condition I am to retire thither,
and have wherewith very well to subsist. Nan, at Sir W. Pen’s, lately
married to one Markeham, a kinsman of Sir W. Pen’s, a pretty wench she
is.