2nd. Up betimes, and forced to go to my Lord Mayor’s, about the business
of the pressed men; and indeed I find him a mean man of understanding
and dispatch of any publique business. Thence out of curiosity to
Bridewell to see the pressed men, where there are about 300; but so
unruly that I durst not go among them: and they have reason to be so,
having been kept these three days prisoners, with little or no
victuals, and pressed out, and, contrary to all course of law, without
press-money, and men that are not liable to it. Here I met with prating
Colonel Cox, one of the City collonells heretofore a great presbyter:
but to hear how the fellow did commend himself, and the service he do
the King; and, like an asse, at Paul’s did take me out of my way on
purpose to show me the gate (the little north gate) where he had two men
shot close by him on each hand, and his own hair burnt by a bullet-shot
in the insurrection of Venner, and himself escaped. Thence home and to
the Tower to see the men from Bridewell shipped. Being rid of him I home
to dinner, and thence to the Excise office by appointment to meet my
Lord Bellasses and the Commissioners, which we did and soon dispatched,
and so I home, and there was called by Pegg Pen to her house, where her
father and mother, and Mrs. Norton, the second Roxalana, a fine woman,
indifferent handsome, good body and hand, and good mine, and pretends to
sing, but do it not excellently. However I took pleasure there, and my
wife was sent for, and Creed come in to us, and so there we spent the
most of the afternoon. Thence weary of losing so much time I to the
office, and thence presently down to Deptford; but to see what a
consternation there is upon the water by reason of this great press,
that nothing is able to get a waterman to appear almost. Here I meant
to have spoke with Bagwell’s mother, but her face was sore, and so I
did not, but returned and upon the water found one of the vessels loaden
with the Bridewell birds in a great mutiny, and they would not sail, not
they; but with good words, and cajoling the ringleader into the Tower
(where, when he was come, he was clapped up in the hole), they were got
very quietly; but I think it is much if they do not run the vessel on
ground. But away they went, and I to the Lieutenant of the Tower, and
having talked with him a little, then home to supper very late and to
bed weary.