29th. Up, and to the office to do business, and thither comes to me
Sir Thomas Teddiman, and he and I walked a good while in the garden
together, discoursing of the disorder and discipline of the fleete,
wherein he told me how bad every thing is; but was very wary in speaking
any thing to the dishonour of the Prince or Duke of Albemarle, but do
magnify my Lord Sandwich much before them both, for ability to serve the
King, and do heartily wish for him here. For he fears that we shall be
undone the next year, but that he will, however, see an end of it. To
prevent the necessity of his dining with me I was forced to pretend
occasion of going to Westminster, so away I went, and Mr. Barber, the
clerk, having a request to make to me to get him into employment, did
walk along with me, and by water to Westminster with me, he professing
great love to me, and an able clerk he is. When I come thither I find
the new Lord Mayor Bolton a-swearing at the Exchequer, with some of the
Aldermen and Livery; but, Lord! to see how meanely they now look, who
upon this day used to be all little lords, is a sad sight and worthy
consideration. And every body did reflect with pity upon the poor City,
to which they are now coming to choose and swear their Lord Mayor,
compared with what it heretofore was. Thence by coach (having in the
Hall bought me a velvet riding cap, cost me 20s.) to my taylor’s, and
there bespoke a plain vest, and so to my goldsmith to bid him look out
for some gold for me; and he tells me that ginnys, which I bought 2,000
of not long ago, and cost me but 18 1/2d. change, will now cost me 22d.;
and but very few to be had at any price. However, some more I will have,
for they are very convenient, and of easy disposal. So home to dinner
and to discourse with my brother upon his translation of my Lord
Bacon’s “Faber Fortunae,” which I gave him to do and he has done it, but
meanely; I am not pleased with it at all, having done it only literally,
but without any life at all. About five o’clock I took my wife (who is
mighty fine, and with a new fair pair of locks, which vex me, though
like a foole I helped her the other night to buy them), and to Mrs.
Pierces, and there staying a little I away before to White Hall, and
into the new playhouse there, the first time I ever was there, and the
first play I have seen since before the great plague. By and by Mr.
Pierce comes, bringing my wife and his, and Knipp. By and by the King
and Queene, Duke and Duchesse, and all the great ladies of the Court;
which, indeed, was a fine sight. But the play being “Love in a Tub,”
 a silly play, and though done by the Duke’s people, yet having neither
Betterton nor his wife, and the whole thing done ill, and being ill
also, I had no manner of pleasure in the play. Besides, the House,
though very fine, yet bad for the voice, for hearing. The sight of the
ladies, indeed, was exceeding noble; and above all, my Lady Castlemayne.
The play done by ten o’clock. I carried them all home, and then home
myself, and well satisfied with the sight, but not the play, we with
great content to bed.