12th. But was up again by five o’clock, and was forced to rise, having
much business, and so up and dressed myself (enquiring, was told that
Mrs. Tooker was gone hence to live at London) and away with Poundy to
the Tower, and thence, having shifted myself, but being mighty drowsy
for want of sleep, I by coach to St. James’s, to Goring House, there to
wait on my Lord Arlington to give him an account of my night’s worke,
but he was not up, being not long since married: so, after walking
up and down the house below,--being the house I was once at Hartlib’s
sister’s wedding, and is a very fine house and finely furnished,--and
then thinking it too much for me to lose time to wait my Lord’s rising,
I away to St. James’s, and there to Sir W. Coventry, and wrote a letter
to my Lord Arlington giving him an account of what I have done, and
so with Sir W. Coventry into London, to the office. And all the way I
observed him mightily to make mirth of the Duke of Albemarle and his
people about him, saying, that he was the happiest man in the world for
doing of great things by sorry instruments. And so particularized in Sir
W. Clerke, and Riggs, and Halsey, and others. And then again said that
the only quality eminent in him was, that he did persevere; and indeed
he is a very drudge, and stands by the King’s business. And this he
said, that one thing he was good at, that he never would receive an
excuse if the thing was not done; listening to no reasoning for it, be
it good or bad. But then I told him, what he confessed, that he would
however give the man, that he employs, orders for removing of any
obstruction that he thinks he shall meet with in the world, and
instanced in several warrants that he issued for breaking open of houses
and other outrages about the business of prizes, which people bore with
either for affection or fear, which he believes would not have been
borne with from the King, nor Duke, nor any man else in England, and
I thinke he is in the right, but it is not from their love of him, but
from something else I cannot presently say. Sir W. Coventry did further
say concerning Warcupp, his kinsman, that had the simplicity to tell Sir
W. Coventry, that the Duke did intend to go to sea and to leave him his
agent on shore for all things that related to the sea. But, says Sir
W. Coventry, I did believe but the Duke of Yorke would expect to be
his agent on shore for all sea matters. And then he begun to say what a
great man Warcupp was, and something else, and what was that but a great
lyer; and told me a story, how at table he did, they speaking about
antipathys, say, that a rose touching his skin any where, would make it
rise and pimple; and, by and by, the dessert coming, with roses upon it,
the Duchesse bid him try, and they did; but they rubbed and rubbed, but
nothing would do in the world, by which his lie was found at then. He
spoke contemptibly of Holmes and his mermidons, that come to take down
the ships from hence, and have carried them without any necessaries, or
any thing almost, that they will certainly be longer getting ready than
if they had staid here. In fine, I do observe, he hath no esteem nor
kindnesse for the Duke’s matters, but, contrarily, do slight him and
them; and I pray God the Kingdom do not pay too dear by this jarring;
though this blockheaded Duke I did never expect better from. At the
office all the morning, at noon home and thought to have slept, my head
all day being full of business and yet sleepy and out of order, and so
I lay down on my bed in my gowne to sleep, but I could not, therefore
about three o’clock up and to dinner and thence to the office, where.
Mrs. Burroughs, my pretty widow, was and so I did her business and sent
her away by agreement, and presently I by coach after and took her up in
Fenchurch Streete and away through the City, hiding my face as much as
I could, but she being mighty pretty and well enough clad, I was not
afeard, but only lest somebody should see me and think me idle. I quite
through with her, and so into the fields Uxbridge way, a mile or two
beyond Tyburne, and then back and then to Paddington, and then back to
Lyssen green, a place the coachman led me to (I never knew in my life)
and there we eat and drank and so back to Chasing Crosse, and there I
set her down. All the way most excellent pretty company. I had her lips
as much as I would, and a mighty pretty woman she is and very modest and
yet kinde in all fair ways. All this time I passed with mighty pleasure,
it being what I have for a long time wished for, and did pay this day