4th. Up by break of day to get away the remainder of my things; which I
did by a lighter at the Iron gate and my hands so few, that it was
the afternoon before we could get them all away. Sir W. Pen and I to
Tower-streete, and there met the fire burning three or four doors beyond
Mr. Howell’s, whose goods, poor man, his trayes, and dishes, shovells,
&c., were flung all along Tower-street in the kennels, and people
working therewith from one end to the other; the fire coming on in that
narrow streete, on both sides, with infinite fury. Sir W. Batten not
knowing how to remove his wine, did dig a pit in the garden, and laid
it in there; and I took the opportunity of laying all the papers of my
office that I could not otherwise dispose of. And in the evening Sir
W. Pen and I did dig another, and put our wine in it; and I my Parmazan
cheese, as well as my wine and some other things. The Duke of Yorke
was at the office this day, at Sir W. Pen’s; but I happened not to
be within. This afternoon, sitting melancholy with Sir W. Pen in our
garden, and thinking of the certain burning of this office, without
extraordinary means, I did propose for the sending up of all our workmen
from Woolwich and Deptford yards (none whereof yet appeared), and to
write to Sir W. Coventry to have the Duke of Yorke’s permission to pull
down houses, rather than lose this office, which would, much hinder, the
King’s business. So Sir W. Pen he went down this night, in order to the
sending them up to-morrow morning; and I wrote to Sir W. Coventry about
the business, but received no answer. This night Mrs. Turner (who, poor
woman, was removing her goods all this day, good goods into the garden,
and knows not how to dispose of them), and her husband supped with my
wife and I at night, in the office; upon a shoulder of mutton from
the cook’s, without any napkin or any thing, in a sad manner, but were
merry. Only now and then walking into the garden, and saw how horridly
the sky looks, all on a fire in the night, was enough to put us out of
our wits; and, indeed, it was extremely dreadful, for it looks just as
if it was at us; and the whole heaven on fire. I after supper walked in
the darke down to Tower-streete, and there saw it all on fire, at the
Trinity House on that side, and the Dolphin Taverne on this side, which
was very near us; and the fire with extraordinary vehemence. Now begins
the practice of blowing up of houses in Tower-streete, those next the
Tower, which at first did frighten people more than anything, but it
stopped the fire where it was done, it bringing down the

     [A copy of this letter, preserved among the Pepys MSS. in the
     author’s own handwriting, is subjoined:

     “SIR, The fire is now very neere us as well on Tower Streete as
     Fanchurch Street side, and we little hope of our escape but by this
     remedy, to ye want whereof we doe certainly owe ye loss of ye City
     namely, ye pulling down of houses, in ye way of ye fire.  This way
     Sir W. Pen and myself have so far concluded upon ye practising, that
     he is gone to Woolwich and Deptford to supply himself with men and
     necessarys in order to the doeing thereof, in case at his returne
     our condition be not bettered and that he meets with his R. Hs.
     approbation, which I had thus undertaken to learn of you.  Pray
     please to let me have this night (at whatever hour it is) what his
     R. Hs. directions are in this particular; Sir J. Minnes and Sir W.
     Batten having left us, we cannot add, though we are well assured of
     their, as well as all ye neighbourhood’s concurrence.

                              “Yr. obedient servnt.
                                                  “S. P.

     “Sir W. Coventry,
     “Septr.  4, 1666.”]

houses to the ground in the same places they stood, and then it was easy
to quench what little fire was in it, though it kindled nothing almost.
W. Newer this day went to see how his mother did, and comes late home,
telling us how he hath been forced to remove her to Islington, her house
in Pye-corner being burned; so that the fire is got so far that way, and
all the Old Bayly, and was running down to Fleete-streete; and Paul’s
is burned, and all Cheapside. I wrote to my father this night, but the
post-house being burned, the letter could not go.

     [J. Hickes wrote to Williamson on September 3rd from the “Golden
     Lyon,” Red Cross Street Posthouse.  Sir Philip [Frowde] and his lady
     fled from the [letter] office at midnight for: safety; stayed
     himself till 1 am. till his wife and childrens’ patience could stay,
     no longer, fearing lest they should be quite stopped up; the passage
     was so tedious they had much ado to get where they are.  The Chester
     and Irish, mails have come-in; sends him his letters, knows not how
     to dispose of the business (“Calendar of State Papers,” 1666-67,
     p. 95).]