8th. Up and to my office, called up by Commissioner Middleton, newly
come to town, but staid not with me; so I to my office busy all the
morning. Towards noon, by water to Westminster Hall, and there by
several hear that the Parliament do resolve to do something to retrench
Sir G. Carteret’s great salary; but cannot hear of any thing bad they
can lay to his charge. The House did this day order to be engrossed the
Bill against importing Irish cattle; a thing, it seems, carried on by
the Western Parliament-men, wholly against the sense of most of the rest
of the House; who think if you do this, you give the Irish again cause
to rebel. Thus plenty on both sides makes us mad. The Committee of the
Canary Company of both factions come to me for my Cozen Roger that is
of the Committee. Thence with [Sir] W. Coventry when the House rose and
[Sir] W. Batten to St. James’s, and there agreed of and signed our paper
of extraordinaries, and there left them, and I to Unthanke’s, where
Mr. Falconbridge’s girle is, and by and by comes my wife, who likes her
well, though I confess I cannot (though she be of my finding out and
sings pretty well), because she will be raised from so mean a condition
to so high all of a sudden; but she will be much to our profit, more
than Mercer, less expense. Here we bespoke anew gowne for her, and to
come to us on Friday. She being gone, my wife and I home by coach, and
then I presently by water with Mr. Pierce to Westminster Hall, he in the
way telling me how the Duke of York and Duke of Albemarle do not agree.
The Duke of York is wholly given up to this bitch of Denham. The Duke of
Albemarle and Prince Rupert do less agree. So that we are all in
pieces, and nobody knows what will be done the next year. The King hath
yesterday in Council declared his resolution of setting a fashion for
clothes, which he will never alter.

     [There are several references to this new fashion of dress
     introduced by the king, Pepys saw the Duke of York put on the vest
     on the 13th, and he says Charles II. himself put it on on the 15th.
     On November 4th Pepys dressed himself in the new vest and coat.  See
     notes, October 15th and November 22nd.]

It will be a vest, I know not well how; but it is to teach the nobility
thrift, and will do good. By and by comes down from the Committee [Sir]
W. Coventry, and I find him troubled at several things happened this
afternoon, which vexes me also; our business looking worse and worse,
and our worke growing on our hands. Time spending, and no money to set
anything in hand with; the end thereof must be speedy ruine. The Dutch
insult and have taken off Bruant’s head,

     [Captain Du Buat, a Frenchman in the Dutch service, plotted with two
     magistrates of Rotterdam to obtain a peace with England as the
     readiest means of pressing the elevation of the Prince of Orange to
     the office of Captain-General.  He was brought before the Supreme
     Court of Holland, condemned, and executed.  He had been one of the
     household of the Prince of Orange who were dismissed by De Witt.]

which they have not dared to do (though found guilty of the fault he did
die for, of something of the Prince of Orange’s faction) till just now,
which speaks more confidence in our being worse than before. Alderman
Maynell, I hear, is dead. Thence returned in the darke by coach all
alone, full of thoughts of the consequences of this ill complexion of
affairs, and how to save myself and the little I have, which if I can
do, I have cause to bless God that I am so well, and shall be well
contented to retreat to Brampton, and spend the rest of my days there.
So to my office, and did some business, and finished my Journall with
resolutions, if God bless me, to apply myself soberly to settle all
matters for myself, and expect the event of all with comfort. So home to
supper and to bed.