3rd. Up, and, among a great many people that come to speak with me, one
was my Lord Peterborough’s gentleman, who comes to me to dun me to get
some money advanced for my Lord; and I demanding what newes, he tells me
that at Court they begin to fear the business of Scotland more and more;
and that the Duke of York intends to go to the North to raise an army,
and that the King would have some of the Nobility and others to go and
assist; but they were so served the last year, among others his Lord, in
raising forces at their own charge, for fear of the French invading us,
that they will not be got out now, without money advanced to them by
the King, and this is like to be the King’s case for certain, if ever
he comes to have need of any army. He and others gone, I by water to
Westminster, and there to the Exchequer, and put my tallys in a way of
doing for the last quarter. But my not following it the last week has
occasioned the clerks some trouble, which I am sorry for, and they are
mad at. Thence at noon home, and there find Kate Joyce, who dined
with me: Her husband and she are weary of their new life of being an
Innkeeper, and will leave it, and would fain get some office; but I know
none the foole is fit for, but would be glad to help them, if I could,
though they have enough to live on, God be thanked! though their loss
hath been to the value of L3000 W. Joyce now has all the trade, she
says, the trade being come to that end of the towne. She dined with me,
my wife being ill of her months in bed. I left her with my wife, and
away myself to Westminster Hall by appointment and there found out
Burroughs, and I took her by coach as far as the Lord Treasurer’s and
called at the cake house by Hales’s, and there in the coach eat and
drank and then carried her home.... So having set her down in the palace
I to the Swan, and there did the first time ‘baiser’ the little sister
of Sarah that is come into her place, and so away by coach home, where
to my vyall and supper and then to bed, being weary of the following of
my pleasure and sorry for my omitting (though with a true salvo to my
vowes) the stating my last month’s accounts in time, as I should, but
resolve to settle, and clear all my business before me this month, that
I may begin afresh the next yeare, and enjoy some little pleasure freely
at Christmasse. So to bed, and with more cheerfulness than I have done
a good while, to hear that for certain the Scott rebells are all routed;
they having been so bold as to come within three miles of Edinburgh, and
there given two or three repulses to the King’s forces, but at last
were mastered. Three or four hundred killed or taken, among which their
leader, one Wallis, and seven ministers, they having all taken the
Covenant a few days before, and sworn to live and die in it, as they
did; and so all is likely to be there quiet again. There is also
the very good newes come of four New-England ships come home safe to
Falmouth with masts for the King; which is a blessing mighty unexpected,
and without which, if for nothing else, we must have failed the next
year. But God be praised for thus much good fortune, and send us the
continuance of his favour in other things! So to bed.