20th. Up, and finding by a letter late last night that the fleete is
gone, and that Sir W. Pen is ordered to go down to Sheernesse, and
finding him ready to go to St. James’s this morning, I was willing to go
with him to see how things go,

     [Sir William Penn’s instructions from the Duke of York directing him
     to embark on his Majesty’s yacht “Henrietta,” and to see to the
     manning of such ships has had been left behind by the fleet, dated
     on this day, 20th July, is printed in Penn’s “Memorials of Sir W.
     Penn,” vol. ii., p. 406.]

and so with him thither (but no discourse with the Duke), but to White
Hall, and there the Duke of York did bid Sir W. Pen to stay to discourse
with him and the King about business of the fleete, which troubled me a
little, but it was only out of envy, for which I blame myself, having no
reason to expect to be called to advise in a matter I understand not. So
I away to Lovett’s, there to see how my picture goes on to be varnished
(a fine Crucifix),

     [This picture occasioned Pepys trouble long afterwards, having been
     brought as evidence that he was a Papist (see “Life,” vol. i., p.
     xxxiii).]

which will be very fine; and here I saw some fine prints, brought from
France by Sir Thomas Crew, who is lately returned. So home, calling at
the stationer’s for some paper fit to varnish, and in my way home met
with Lovett, to whom I gave it, and he did present me with a varnished
staffe, very fine and light to walk with. So home and to dinner, there
coming young Mrs. Daniel and her sister Sarah, and dined with us; and
old Mr. Hawly, whose condition pities me, he being forced to turne under
parish-clerke at St. Gyles’s, I think at the other end of the towne.
Thence I to the office, where busy all the afternoon, and in the evening
with Sir W. Pen, walking with whom in the garden I am of late mighty
great, and it is wisdom to continue myself so, for he is of all the men
of the office at present most manifestly usefull and best thought of. He
and I supped together upon the seat in the garden, and thence, he gone,
my wife and Mercer come and walked and sang late, and then home to bed.