3rd. About four o’clock in the morning, my Lady Batten sent me a cart to
carry away all my money, and plate, and best things, to Sir W. Rider’s
at Bednall-greene. Which I did riding myself in my night-gowne in the
cart; and, Lord! to see how the streets and the highways are crowded
with people running and riding, and getting of carts at any rate to
fetch away things. I find Sir W. Rider tired with being called up all
night, and receiving things from several friends. His house full of
goods, and much of Sir W. Batten’s and Sir W. Pen’s I am eased at my
heart to have my treasure so well secured. Then home, with much ado to
find a way, nor any sleep all this night to me nor my poor wife. But
then and all this day she and I, and all my people labouring to get away
the rest of our things, and did get Mr. Tooker to get me a lighter to
take them in, and we did carry them (myself some) over Tower Hill, which
was by this time full of people’s goods, bringing their goods thither;
and down to the lighter, which lay at next quay, above the Tower Docke.
And here was my neighbour’s wife, Mrs.-------,with her pretty child, and
some few of her things, which I did willingly give way to be saved with
mine; but there was no passing with any thing through the postern, the
crowd was so great. The Duke of Yorke of this day by the office, and
spoke to us, and did ride with his guard up and down the City, to keep
all quiet (he being now Generall, and having the care of all). This day,
Mercer being not at home, but against her mistress’s order gone to her
mother’s, and my wife going thither to speak with W. Hewer, met her
there, and was angry; and her mother saying that she was not a ‘prentice
girl, to ask leave every time she goes abroad, my wife with good reason
was angry, and, when she came home, bid her be gone again. And so she
went away, which troubled me, but yet less than it would, because of the
condition we are in, fear of coming into in a little time of being less
able to keepe one in her quality. At night lay down a little upon a
quilt of W. Hewer’s in the office, all my owne things being packed up
or gone; and after me my poor wife did the like, we having fed upon
the remains of yesterday’s dinner, having no fire nor dishes, nor any
opportunity of dressing any thing.