11th. Up, and down by water to Sir W. Warren’s (the first time I was
in his new house on the other side the water since he enlarged it) to
discourse about our lighters that he hath bought for me, and I hope to
get L100 by this jobb. Having done with him I took boat again (being
mightily struck with a woman in a hat, a seaman’s mother,--[Mother or
mauther, a wench.]--that stood on the key) and home, where at the office
all the morning with Sir W. Coventry and some others of our board hiring
of fireships, and Sir W. Coventry begins to see my pains again, which I
do begin to take, and I am proud of it, and I hope shall continue it. He
gone, at noon I home to dinner, and after dinner my father and wife out
to the painter’s to sit again, and I, with my Lady Pen and her daughter,
to see Harman; whom we find lame in bed. His bones of his anckle are
broke, but he hopes to do well soon; and a fine person by his discourse
he seems to be and my hearty [friend]; and he did plainly tell me that
at the Council of War before the fight, it was against his reason to
begin the fight then, and the reasons of most sober men there, the wind
being such, and we to windward, that they could not use their lower tier
of guns, which was a very sad thing for us to have the honour and weal
of the nation ventured so foolishly. I left them there, and walked to
Deptford, reading in Walsingham’s Manual, a very good book, and there
met with Sir W. Batten and my Lady at Uthwayt’s. Here I did much
business and yet had some little mirthe with my Lady, and anon we
all come up together to our office, where I was very late doing much
business. Late comes Sir J. Bankes to see me, and tells me that coming
up from Rochester he overtook three or four hundred seamen, and he
believes every day they come flocking from the fleete in like numbers;
which is a sad neglect there, when it will be impossible to get others,
and we have little reason to think that these will return presently
again. He gone, I to end my letters to-night, and then home to supper
and to bed.