20th. Up, but in some pain of the collique. I have of late taken too
much cold by washing my feet and going in a thin silke waistcoate,
without any other coate over it, and open-breasted, but I hope it will
go over. I did this morning (my father being to go away to-morrow) give
my father some money to buy him a horse, and for other things to himself
and my mother and sister, among them L20, besides undertaking to pay
for other things for them to about L3, which the poor man takes with
infinite kindnesse, and I do not thinke I can bestow it better. Thence
by coach to St. James’s as usual to wait on the Duke of York, after
having discoursed with Collonell Fitzgerald, whom I met in my way and he
returned with me to Westminster, about paying him a sum of 700 and
odd pounds, and he bids me defalk L25 for myself,--[Abate from an
amount.]--which is a very good thing; having done with the Duke I to the
Exchequer and there after much ado do get my business quite over of the
difficulty of breaking a great tally into little ones and so shall have
it done tomorrow. Thence to the Hall and with Mrs. Martin home and staid
with her a while, and then away to the Swan and sent for a bit of meat
and dined there, and thence to Faythorne, the picture-seller’s, and
there chose two or three good Cutts to try to vernish, and so to Hales’s
to see my father’s picture, which is now near finished and is very good,
and here I staid and took a nap of an hour, thinking my father and wife
would have come, but they did not; so I away home as fast as I could,
fearing lest my father this day going abroad to see Mr. Honiwood at
Major Russell’s might meet with any trouble, and so in great pain home;
but to spite me, in Cheapside I met Mrs. Williams in a coach, and she
called me, so I must needs ‘light and go along with her and poor Knipp
(who is so big as she can tumble and looks-every day to lie down) as
far as Paternoster Row, which I did do and there staid in Bennett’s shop
with them, and was fearfull lest the people of the shop, knowing me,
should aske after my father and give Mrs. Williams any knowledge of
me to my disgrace. Having seen them done there and accompanied them to
Ludgate I ‘light and into my owne coach and home, where I find my father
and wife had had no intent of coming at all to Hales’s. So I at home all
the evening doing business, and at night in the garden (it having been
these three or four days mighty hot weather) singing in the evening, and
then home to supper and to bed.