9th. Up, and to St. James’s, there to wait on the Duke of Yorke, and had
discourse with him about several businesses of the fleete. But, Lord! to
see how the Court is divided about The Swiftsure and The Essex’s being
safe. And wagers and odds laid on both sides. I did tell the Duke how
Sir W. Batten did tell me this morning that he was sure the Swiftsure is
safe. This put them all in a great joy and certainty of it, but this
I doubt will prove nothing. Thence to White Ball in expectation of a
meeting of Tangier, and we did industriously labour to have it this
morning; but we could not get a fifth person there, so after much pains
and thoughts on my side on behalfe of Yeabsly, we were fain to breake
up. But, Lord! to see with what patience Lord Ashly did stay all the
morning to get a Committee, little thinking that I know the reason of
his willingnesse. So I home to dinner and back again to White Hall,
and, being come thither a little too soon, went to Westminster Hall, and
bought a payre of gloves, and to see how people do take this late fight
at sea, and I find all give over the thoughts of it as a victory and to
reckon it a great overthrow. So to White Hall, and there when we were
come all together in certain expectation of doing our business
to Yeabsly’s full content, and us that were his friends, my Lord
Peterborough (whether through some difference between him and my Lord
Ashly, or him and me or Povy, or through the falsenesse of Creed, I know
not) do bring word that the Duke of Yorke (who did expressly bid me wait
at the Committee for the dispatch of the business) would not have us go
forward in this business of allowing the losse of the ships till Sir
G. Carteret and Sir W. Coventry were come to towne, which was the very
thing indeed which we would have avoided. This being told us, we broke
up doing nothing, to my great discontent, though I said nothing, and
afterwards I find by my Lord Ashly’s discourse to me that he is troubled
mightily at it, and indeed it is a great abuse of him and of the whole
Commissioners that nothing of that nature can be done without Sir G.
Carteret or Sir W. Coventry. No sooner was the Committee up, and I going
[through] the Court homeward, but I am told Sir W. Coventry is come to
town; so I to his chamber, and there did give him an account how matters
go in our office, and with some content I parted from him, after we had
discoursed several things of the haste requisite to be made in getting
the fleete out again and the manner of doing it. But I do not hear that
he is at all pleased or satisfied with the late fight; but he tells me
more newes of our suffering, by the death of one or two captains more
than I knew before. But he do give over the thoughts of the safety of
The Swiftsure or Essex. Thence homewards, landed at the Old Swan, and
there find my pretty Betty Michell and her husband at their doore in
Thames Streete, which I was glad to find, and went into their shop, and
they made me drink some of their strong water, the first time I was ever
with them there. I do exceedingly love her. After sitting a little and
talking with them about several things at great distance I parted and
home to my business late. But I am to observe how the drinking of some
strong water did immediately put my eyes into a fit of sorenesse again
as they were the other day. I mean my right eye only. Late at night I
had an account brought me by Sir W. Warren that he has gone through
four lighters for me, which pleases me very well. So home to bed, much
troubled with our disappointment at the Tangier Committee.