18th. Up betimes and in my chamber most of the morning setting things to
rights there, my Journall and accounts with my father and brother, then
to the office a little, and so to Lumbard Streete, to borrow a little
money upon a tally, but cannot. Thence to the Exchequer, and there after
much wrangling got consent that I should have a great tally broken into
little ones. Thence to Hales’s to see how my father’s picture goes on,
which pleases me mighty well, though I find again, as I did in Mrs.
Pierce’s, that a picture may have more of a likeness in the first or
second working than it shall have when finished, though this is very
well and to my full content, but so it is, and certainly mine was not so
like at the first, second, or third sitting as it was afterward. Thence
to my Lord Bellasses, by invitation, and there dined with him, and his
lady and daughter; and at dinner there played to us a young boy, lately
come from France, where he had been learning a yeare or two on the
viallin, and plays finely. But impartially I do not find any goodnesse
in their ayres (though very good) beyond ours when played by the same
hand, I observed in several of Baptiste’s’

     [Jean Baptiste Lulli, son of a Tuscan peasant, born 1633, died 1687.
     He invented the dramatic overture.  “But during the first years of
     Charles II. all musick affected by the beau mond run in the french
     way; and the rather because at that time the master of the court
     musick in France, whose name was Baptista (an Italian frenchifyed)
     had influenced the french style by infusing a great portion of the
     Italian harmony into it, whereby the ayre was exceedingly improved”
      (North’s “Memoires of Musick,” ed. Rimbault, 1846, p, 102).]

(the present great composer) and our Bannister’s. But it was pretty to
see how passionately my Lord’s daughter loves musique, the most that
ever I saw creature in my life. Thence after dinner home and to the
office and anon to Lumbard Streete again, where much talke at Colvill’s,
he censuring the times, and how matters are ordered, and with reason
enough; but, above all, the thinking to borrow money of the City, which
will not be done, but be denied, they being little pleased with the
King’s affairs, and that must breed differences between the King and
the City. Thence down by water to Deptford, to order things away to the
fleete and back again, and after some business at my office late home
to supper and to bed. Sir W. Coventry is returned this night from the
fleete, he being the activest man in the world, and we all (myself
particularly) more afeard of him than of the King or his service, for
aught I see; God forgive us! This day the great newes is come of the
French, their taking the island of St. Christopher’s’ from us; and it
is to be feared they have done the like of all those islands thereabouts
this makes the city mad.