27th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and here I
had a letter from Mr. Brisband on another occasion, which, by the by,
intimates my Lord Hinchingbroke’s intention to come and dine with me
to-morrow. This put me into a great surprise, and therefore endeavoured
all I could to hasten over our business at the office, and so home at
noon and to dinner, and then away by coach, it being a very foul day, to
White Hall, and there at Sir G. Carteret’s find my Lord Hinchingbroke,
who promises to dine with me to-morrow, and bring Mr. Carteret along
with him. Here I staid a little while talking with him and the ladies,
and then away to my Lord Crew’s, and then did by the by make a visit to
my Lord Crew, and had some good discourse with him, he doubting that all
will break in pieces in the kingdom; and that the taxes now coming out,
which will tax the same man in three or four several capacities, as for
lands, office, profession, and money at interest, will be the hardest
that ever come out; and do think that we owe it, and the lateness of its
being given, wholly to the unpreparedness of the King’s own party, to
make their demand and choice; for they have obstructed the giving it by
land-tax, which had been done long since. Having ended my visit, I
spoke to Sir Thomas Crew, to invite him and his brother John to dinner
tomorrow, at my house, to meet Lord Hinchingbroke; and so homewards,
calling at the cook’s, who is to dress it, to bespeak him, and then
home, and there set things in order for a very fine dinner, and then to
the office, where late very busy and to good purpose as to dispatch of
business, and then home. To bed, my people sitting up to get things in
order against to-morrow. This evening was brought me what Griffin had,
as he says, taken this evening off of the table in the office, a letter
sealed and directed to the Principal Officers and Commissioners of the
Navy. It is a serious and just libel against our disorder in paying of
our money, making ten times more people wait than we have money for,
and complaining by name of Sir W. Batten for paying away great sums
to particular people, which is true. I was sorry to see this way of
reproach taken against us, but more sorry that there is true ground for
it.