27th. Up, and there comes to see me my Lord Belasses, which was a great
honour. He tells me great newes, yet but what I suspected, that Vernatty
is fled, and so hath cheated him and twenty more, but most of all, I
doubt, Mr. Povy. Thence to talk about publique business; he tells me how
the two Houses begin to be troublesome; the Lords to have quarrels
one with another. My Lord Duke of Buckingham having said to the Lord
Chancellor (who is against the passing of the Bill for prohibiting the
bringing over of Irish cattle), that whoever was against the Bill, was
there led to it by an Irish interest, or an Irish understanding,
which is as much as to say he is a Poole; this bred heat from my Lord
Chancellor, and something he [Buckingham] said did offend my Lord of
Ossory (my Lord Duke’ of Ormond’s son), and they two had hard words,
upon which the latter sends a challenge to the former; of which the
former complains to the House, and so the business is to be heard on
Monday next. Then as to the Commons; some ugly knives, like poignards,
to stab people with, about two or three hundred of them were brought
in yesterday to the House, found in one of the house’s rubbish that
was burned, and said to be the house of a Catholique. This and several
letters out of the country, saying how high the Catholiques are
everywhere and bold in the owning their religion, have made the Commons
mad, and they presently voted that the King be desired to put all
Catholiques out of employment, and other high things; while the business
of money hangs in the hedge. So that upon the whole, God knows we are in
a sad condition like to be, there being the very beginnings of the late
troubles. He gone, I at the office all the morning. At noon home to
dinner, where Mrs. Pierce and her boy and Knipp, who sings as well, and
is the best company in the world, dined with us, and infinite merry. The
playhouses begin to play next week. Towards evening I took them out to
the New Exchange, and there my wife bought things, and I did give each
of them a pair of Jesimy

     [Jessemin (Jasminum), the flowers of which are of a delicate sweet
     smell, and often used to perfume gloves.  Edmund Howes, Stows
     continuator, informs us that sweet or perfumed gloves were first
     brought into England by the Earl of Oxford on his return from Italy,
     in the fifteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, during whose reign, and
     long afterwards, they were very fashionable.  They are frequently
     mentioned by Shakespeare.  Autolyctis, in the “Winter’s Tale,” has
     among his wares--“Gloves as sweet as damask roses.”--B.]

plain gloves, and another of white. Here Knipp and I walked up and down
to see handsome faces, and did see several. Then carried each of them
home, and with great pleasure and content, home myself, where, having
writ several letters, I home, and there, upon some serious discourse
between my wife and I upon the business, I called to us my brother, and
there broke to him our design to send him into the country with some
part of our money, and so did seriously discourse the whole thing,
and then away to supper and to bed. I pray God give a blessing to our
resolution, for I do much fear we shall meet with speedy distractions
for want of money.