23rd. Up, and to my chamber doing several things there of moment, and
then comes Sympson, the Joyner; and he and I with great pains contriving
presses to put my books up in: they now growing numerous, and lying
one upon another on my chairs, I lose the use to avoyde the trouble of
removing them, when I would open a book. Thence out to the Excise office
about business, and then homewards met Colvill, who tells me he hath
L1000 ready for me upon a tally; which pleases me, and yet I know not
now what to do with it, having already as much money as is fit for me
to have in the house, but I will have it. I did also meet Alderman
Backewell, who tells me of the hard usage he now finds from Mr. Fen, in
not getting him a bill or two paid, now that he can be no more usefull
to him; telling me that what by his being abroad and Shaw’s death he
hath lost the ball, but that he doubts not to come to give a kicke at it
still, and then he shall be wiser and keepe it while he hath it. But
he says he hath a good master, the King, who will not suffer him to be
undone, as otherwise he must have been, and I believe him. So home and
to dinner, where I confess, reflecting upon the ease and plenty that I
live in, of money, goods, servants, honour, every thing, I could not but
with hearty thanks to Almighty God ejaculate my thanks to Him while I
was at dinner, to myself. After dinner to the office and there till five
or six o’clock, and then by coach to St. James’s and there with Sir W.
Coventry and Sir G. Downing to take the gyre in the Parke. All full
of expectation of the fleete’s engagement, but it is not yet. Sir W.
Coventry says they are eighty-nine men-of-warr, but one fifth-rate,
and that, the Sweepstakes, which carries forty guns. They are most
infinitely manned. He tells me the Loyall London, Sir J. Smith (which,
by the way, he commends to be the-best ship in the world, large and
small), hath above eight hundred men; and moreover takes notice, which
is worth notice, that the fleete hath lane now near fourteen days
without any demand for a farthingworth of any thing of any kind, but
only to get men. He also observes, that with this excesse of men,
nevertheless, they have thought fit to leave behind them sixteen ships,
which they have robbed of their men, which certainly might have been
manned, and they been serviceable in the fight, and yet the fleete
well-manned, according to the excesse of supernumeraries, which we hear
they have. At least two or three of them might have been left manned,
and sent away with the Gottenburgh ships. They conclude this to be much
the best fleete, for force of guns, greatnesse and number of ships
and men, that ever England did see; being, as Sir W. Coventry
reckons, besides those left behind, eighty-nine men of warr and twenty
fire-ships, though we cannot hear that they have with them above
eighteen. The French are not yet joined with the Dutch, which do
dissatisfy the Hollanders, and if they should have a defeat, will
undo De Witt; the people generally of Holland do hate this league with
France. We cannot think of any business, but lie big with expectation of
the issue of this fight, but do conclude that, this fight being over,
we shall be able to see the whole issue of the warr, good or bad. So
homeward, and walked over the Parke (St. James’s) with Sir G. Downing,
and at White Hall took a coach; and there to supper with much pleasure
and to bed.