27th. A very furious blowing night all the night; and my mind still
mightily perplexed with dreams, and burning the rest of the town, and
waking in much pain for the fleete. Up, and with my wife by coach as far
as the Temple, and there she to the mercer’s again, and I to look out
Penny, my tailor, to speak for a cloak and cassock for my brother, who
is coming to town; and I will have him in a canonical dress, that he may
be the fitter to go abroad with me. I then to the Exchequer, and there,
among other things, spoke to Mr. Falconbridge about his girle I heard
sing at Nonsuch, and took him and some other ‘Chequer men to the Sun
Taverne, and there spent 2s. 6d. upon them, and he sent for the girle,
and she hath a pretty way of singing, but hath almost forgot for want of
practice. She is poor in clothes, and not bred to any carriage, but will
be soon taught all, and if Mercer do not come again, I think we may have
her upon better terms, and breed her to what we please. Thence to Sir W.
Coventry’s, and there dined with him and Sir W. Batten, the Lieutenant
of the Tower, and Mr. Thin, a pretty gentleman, going to Gottenburgh.
Having dined, Sir W. Coventry, Sir W. Batten, and I walked into his
closet to consider of some things more to be done in a list to be given
to the Parliament of all our ships, and time of entry and discharge. Sir
W. Coventry seems to think they will soon be weary of the business, and
fall quietly into the giving the King what is fit. This he hopes. Thence
I by coach home to the office, and there intending a meeting, but nobody
being there but myself and Sir J. Minnes, who is worse than nothing,
I did not answer any body, but kept to my business in the office till
night, and then Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to me, and thence to Sir W.
Batten’s, and eat a barrel of oysters I did give them, and so home, and
to bed. I have this evening discoursed with W. Hewer about Mercer, I
having a mind to have her again; and I am vexed to hear him say that
she hath no mind to come again, though her mother hath. No newes of
the fleete yet, but that they went by Dover on the 25th towards the
Gunfleete, but whether the Dutch be yet abroad, or no, we hear not. De
Ruyter is not dead, but like to do well. Most think that the gross of
the French fleete are gone home again.