20th. Up, and all the morning at the office, where none met but myself.
So I walked a good while with Mr. Gawden in the garden, who is lately
come from the fleete at the buoy of the Nore, and he do tell me how all
the sober commanders, and even Sir Thomas Allen himself, do complain of
the ill government of the fleete. How Holmes and Jennings have commanded
all the fleete this yeare, that nothing is done upon deliberation, but
if a sober man give his opinion otherwise than the Prince would have it
the Prince would cry, “Damn him, do you follow your orders, and that
is enough for you.” He tells me he hears of nothing but of swearing and
drinking and whoring, and all manner of profaneness, quite through the
whole fleete. He being gone, there comes to me Commissioner Middleton,
whom I took on purpose to walk in the garden with me, and to learn what
he observed when the fleete was at Portsmouth. He says that the fleete
was in such a condition, as to discipline, as if the Devil had commanded
it; so much wickedness of all sorts. Enquiring how it come to pass that
so many ships miscarried this year, he tells me that he enquired; and
the pilots do say, that they dare not do nor go but as the Captains will
have them; and if they offer to do otherwise, the Captains swear they
will run them through. He says that he heard Captain Digby (my Lord of
Bristoll’s son, a young fellow that never was but one year, if that, in
the fleete) say that he did hope he should not see a tarpaulin have the
command of a ship within this twelve months. He observed while he was on
board the Admirall, when the fleete was at Portsmouth, that there was a
faction there. Holmes commanded all on the Prince’s side, and Sir Jeremy
Smith on the Duke’s, and every body that come did apply themselves to
one side or other; and when the Duke of Albemarle was gone away to
come hither, then Sir Jeremy Smith did hang his head, and walked in the
Generall’s ship but like a private commander. He says he was on board
The Prince, when the newes come of the burning of London; and all the
Prince said was, that now Shipton’s prophecy was out; and he heard a
young commander presently swear, that now a citizen’s wife that would
not take under half a piece before, would be occupied for half-a-crowne:
and made mighty sport of it. He says that Hubberd that commanded this
year the Admiral’s ship is a proud conceited fellow (though I thought
otherwise of him), and fit to command a single ship but not a fleete,
and he do wonder that there hath not been more mischief this year than
there hath. He says the fleete come to anchor between the Horse and
the Island, so that when they came to weigh many of the ships could not
turn, but run foul of the Horse, and there stuck, but that the weather
was good. He says that nothing can do the King more disservice, nor
please the standing officers of the ship better than these silly
commanders that now we have, for they sign to anything that their
officers desire of them, nor have judgment to contradict them if they
would. He told me other good things, which made me bless God that we
have received no greater disasters this year than we have, though they
have been the greatest that ever was known in England before, put
all their losses of the King’s ships by want of skill and seamanship
together from the beginning. He being gone, comes Sir G. Carteret, and
he and I walked together awhile, discoursing upon the sad condition of
the times, what need we have, and how impossible it is to get money. He
told me my Lord Chancellor the other day did ask him how it come to pass
that his friend Pepys do so much magnify all things to worst, as I did
on Sunday last, in the bad condition of the fleete. Sir G. Carteret
tells me that he answered him, that I was but the mouth of the rest, and
spoke what they have dictated to me; which did, as he says, presently
take off his displeasure. So that I am well at present with him, but I
must have a care not to be over busy in the office again, and burn my
fingers. He tells me he wishes he had sold his place at some good rate
to somebody or other at the beginning of the warr, and that he would do
it now, but no body will deale with him for it. He tells me the Duke
of Albemarle is very much discontented, and the Duke of York do not, it
seems, please him. He tells me that our case as to money is not to
be made good at present, and therefore wishes a good and speedy peace
before it be too late, and from his discourse methinks I find that there
is something moving towards it. Many people at the office, but having no
more of the office I did put it off till the next meeting. Thence, with
Sir G. Carteret, home to dinner, with him, my Lady and Mr. Ashburnham,
the Cofferer. Here they talk that the Queene hath a great mind to alter
her fashion, and to have the feet seen, which she loves mightily; and
they do believe that it [will] come into it in a little time. Here I
met with the King’s declaration about his proceedings with the King of
Denmarke, and particularly the business of Bergen; but it is so well
writ, that, if it be true, the King of Denmarke is one of the most
absolute wickednesse in the world for a person of his quality. After
dinner home, and there met Mr. Povy by appointment, and there he and I
all the afternoon, till late at night, evening of all accounts between
us, which we did to both our satisfaction; but that which troubles me
most is, that I am to refund to the ignoble Lord Peterborough what he
had given us six months ago, because we did not supply him with money;
but it is no great matter. He gone I to the office, and there did some
business; and so home, my mind in good ease by having done with Povy
in order to the adjusting of all my accounts in a few days. So home to
supper and to bed.