6th. Up betimes, and vexed with my people for having a key taken out of
the chamber doors and nobody knew where it was, as also with my boy for
not being ready as soon as I, though I called him, whereupon I boxed him
soundly, and then to my business at the office and on the Victualling
Office, and thence by water to St. James’s, whither he [the Duke of
York] is now gone, it being a monthly fast-day for the plague. There we
all met, and did our business as usual with the Duke, and among other
things had Captain Cocke’s proposal of East country goods read, brought
by my Lord Bruncker, which I make use of as a monkey do the cat’s foot.
Sir W. Coventry did much oppose it, and it’s likely it will not do;
so away goes my hopes of L500. Thence after the Duke into the Parke,
walking through to White Hall, and there every body listening for guns,
but none heard, and every creature is now overjoyed and concludes upon
very good grounds that the Dutch are beaten because we have heard no
guns nor no newes of our fleete. By and by walking a little further, Sir
Philip Frowde did meet the Duke with an expresse to Sir W. Coventry
(who was by) from Captain Taylor, the Storekeeper at Harwich, being the
narration of Captain Hayward of The Dunkirke; who gives a very serious
account, how upon Monday the two fleetes fought all day till seven at
night, and then the whole fleete of Dutch did betake themselves to a
very plain flight, and never looked back again. That Sir Christopher
Mings is wounded in the leg; that the Generall is well. That it is
conceived reasonably, that of all the Dutch fleete, which, with what
recruits they had, come to one hundred sayle, there is not above fifty
got home; and of them, few if any of their flags. And that little
Captain Bell, in one of the fire-ships, did at the end of the day fire a
ship of 70 guns. We were all so overtaken with this good newes, that the
Duke ran with it to the King, who was gone to chappell, and there all
the Court was in a hubbub, being rejoiced over head and ears in this
good newes. Away go I by coach to the New Exchange, and there did spread
this good newes a little, though I find it had broke out before. And so
home to our own church, it being the common Fast-day, and it was just
before sermon; but, Lord! how all the people in the church stared upon
me to see me whisper to Sir John Minnes and my Lady Pen. Anon I saw
people stirring and whispering below, and by and by comes up the sexton
from my Lady Ford to tell me the newes (which I had brought), being now
sent into the church by Sir W. Batten in writing, and handed from pew
to pew. But that which pleased me as much as the newes, was, to have the
fair Mrs. Middleton at our church, who indeed is a very beautiful lady.
Here after sermon comes to our office 40 people almost of all sorts and
qualities to hear the newes, which I took great delight to tell them.
Then home and found my wife at dinner, not knowing of my being at
church, and after dinner my father and she out to Hales’s, where my
father is to begin to sit to-day for his picture, which I have a desire
to have. I all the afternoon at home doing some business, drawing up my
vowes for the rest of the yeare to Christmas; but, Lord! to see in what
a condition of happiness I am, if I would but keepe myself so; but my
love of pleasure is such, that my very soul is angry with itself for my
vanity in so doing. Anon took coach and to Hales’s, but he was gone out,
and my father and wife gone. So I to Lovett’s, and there to my trouble
saw plainly that my project of varnished books will not take, it not
keeping colour, not being able to take polishing upon a single paper.
Thence home, and my father and wife not coming in, I proceeded with my
coach to take a little ayre as far as Bow all alone, and there turned
back and home; but before I got home, the bonefires were lighted all the
towne over, and I going through Crouched Friars, seeing Mercer at her
mother’s gate, stopped, and ‘light, and into her mother’s, the first
time I ever was there, and find all my people, father and all, at a
very fine supper at W. Hewer’s lodging, very neatly, and to my great
pleasure. After supper, into his chamber, which is mighty fine
with pictures and every thing else, very curious, which pleased me
exceedingly. Thence to the gate, with the women all about me, and Mrs.
Mercer’s son had provided a great many serpents, and so I made the women
all fire some serpents. By and by comes in our faire neighbour, Mrs.
Turner, and two neighbour’s daughters, Mrs. Tite, the elder of whom, a
long red-nosed silly jade; the younger, a pretty black girle, and the
merriest sprightly jade that ever I saw. With them idled away the whole
night till twelve at night at the bonefire in the streets. Some of the
people thereabouts going about with musquets, and did give me two or
three vollies of their musquets, I giving them a crowne to drink; and
so home. Mightily pleased with this happy day’s newes, and the more,
because confirmed by Sir Daniel Harvy, who was in the whole fight with
the Generall, and tells me that there appear but thirty-six in all of
the Dutch fleete left at the end of the voyage when they run home. The
joy of the City was this night exceeding great.