14th. Up, and by water to White Hall, and thence to Westminster, where
I bought several things, as a hone, ribbon, gloves, books, and then took
coach and to Knipp’s lodging, whom I find not ready to go home with me.
So I away to do a little business, among others to call upon Mr. Osborne
for my Tangier warrant for the last quarter, and so to the Exchange
for some things for my wife, and then to Knipp’s again, and there staid
reading of Waller’s verses, while she finished dressing, her husband
being by. I had no other pastime. Her lodging very mean, and the
condition she lives in; yet makes a shew without doors, God bless us! I
carried him along with us into the City, and set him down in Bishopsgate
Street, and then home with her. She tells me how Smith, of the Duke’s
house, hath killed a man upon a quarrel in play; which makes every body
sorry, he being a good actor, and, they say, a good man, however this
happens. The ladies of the Court do much bemoan him, she says. Here she
and we alone at dinner to some good victuals, that we could not put off,
that was intended for the great dinner of my Lord Hinchingbroke’s, if
he had come. After dinner I to teach her my new recitative of “It is
decreed,” of which she learnt a good part, and I do well like it and
believe shall be well pleased when she hath it all, and that it will
be found an agreeable thing. Then carried her home, and my wife and I
intended to have seen my Lady Jemimah at White Hall, but the Exchange
Streete was so full of coaches, every body, as they say, going thither
to make themselves fine against tomorrow night, that, after half an
hour’s stay, we could not do any [thing], only my wife to see her
brother, and I to go speak one word with Sir G. Carteret about office
business, and talk of the general complexion of matters, which he looks
upon, as I do, with horrour, and gives us all for an undone people.
That there is no such thing as a peace in hand, nor possibility of any
without our begging it, they being as high, or higher, in their terms
than ever, and tells me that, just now, my Lord Hollis had been with
him, and wept to think in what a condition we are fallen. He shewed
me my Lord Sandwich’s letter to him, complaining of the lack of money,
which Sir G. Carteret is at a loss how in the world to get the King
to supply him with, and wishes him, for that reason, here; for that he
fears he will be brought to disgrace there, for want of supplies. He
says the House is yet in a bad humour; and desiring to know whence it is
that the King stirs not, he says he minds it not, nor will be brought
to it, and that his servants of the House do, instead of making the
Parliament better, rather play the rogue one with another, and will put
all in fire. So that, upon the whole, we are in a wretched condition,
and I went from him in full apprehensions of it. So took up my wife, her
brother being yet very bad, and doubtful whether he will recover or no,
and so to St. Ellen’s [St. Helen’s], and there sent my wife home, and
myself to the Pope’s Head, where all the Houblons were, and Dr. Croone,

     [William Croune, or Croone, of Emanuel College, Cambridge, chosen
     Rhetoric Professor at Gresham College, 1659, F.R.S. and M.D. Died