22nd. Up, and set my people to work in copying Tangier accounts, and I
down the river to Greenwich to the office to fetch away some papers and
thence to Deptford, where by agreement my Lord Bruncker was to come, but
staid almost till noon, after I had spent an houre with W. Howe talking
of my Lord Sandwich’s matters and his folly in minding his pleasures too
much now-a-days, and permitting himself to be governed by Cuttance to
the displeasing of all the Commanders almost of the fleete, and thence
we may conceive indeed the rise of all my Lord’s misfortunes of late.
At noon my Lord Bruncker did come, but left the keys of the chests
we should open, at Sir G. Carteret’s lodgings, of my Lord Sandwich’s,
wherein Howe’s supposed jewells are; so we could not, according to my
Lord Arlington’s order, see them today; but we parted, resolving to meet
here at night: my Lord Bruncker being going with Dr. Wilkins, Mr. Hooke,
and others, to Colonell Blunts, to consider again of the business of
charriots, and to try their new invention. Which I saw here my Lord
Bruncker ride in; where the coachman sits astride upon a pole over the
horse, but do not touch the horse, which is a pretty odde thing; but it
seems it is most easy for the horse, and, as they say, for the man also.
Thence I with speede by water home and eat a bit, and took my accounts
and to the Duke of Albemarle, where for all I feared of Norwood he was
very civill, and Sir Thomas Ingram beyond expectation, I giving them all
content and I thereby settled mightily in my mind, for I was weary of
the employment, and had had thoughts of giving it over. I did also give
a good step in a business of Mr. Hubland’s, about getting a ship of his
to go to Tangier, which during this strict embargo is a great matter,
and I shall have a good reward for it, I hope. Thence by water in the
darke down to Deptford, and there find my Lord Bruncker come and gone,
having staid long for me. I back presently to the Crowne taverne behind
the Exchange by appointment, and there met the first meeting of Gresham
College since the plague. Dr. Goddard did fill us with talke, in defence
of his and his fellow physicians going out of towne in the plague-time;
saying that their particular patients were most gone out of towne, and
they left at liberty; and a great deal more, &c. But what, among other
fine discourse pleased me most, was Sir G. Ent about Respiration; that
it is not to this day known, or concluded on among physicians, nor to be
done either, how the action is managed by nature, or for what use it
is. Here late till poor Dr. Merriot was drunk, and so all home, and I to
bed.