2nd. Up, and to the office and thence with Mr. Gawden to Guildhall to
see the bills and tallys there in the chamber (and by the way in the
streete his new coach broke and we fain to take an old hackney). Thence
to the Exchequer again to inform myself of some other points in the new
Act in order to my lending Sir W. Warren L2000 upon an order of his upon
the Act, which they all encourage me to. There walking with Mr. Gawden
in Westminster Hall, he and I to talke from one business to another and
at last to the marriage of his daughter. He told me the story of Creed’s
pretences to his daughter, and how he would not believe but she loved
him, while his daughter was in great passion on the other hand against
him. Thence to talke of his son Benjamin; and I propounded a match
for him, and at last named my sister, which he embraces heartily, and
speaking of the lowness of her portion, that it would be less than
L1000, he tells me if every thing else agrees, he will out of what he
means to give me yearly, make a portion for her shall cost me nothing
more than I intend freely. This did mightily rejoice me and full of it
did go with him to London to the ‘Change; and there did much business
and at the Coffee-house with Sir W. Warren, who very wisely did shew
me that my matching my sister with Mr. Gawden would undo me in all my
places, everybody suspecting me in all I do; and I shall neither be able
to serve him, nor free myself from imputation of being of his faction,
while I am placed for his severest check. I was convinced that it would
be for neither of our interests to make this alliance, and so am quite
off of it again, but with great satisfaction in the motion. Thence to
the Crowne tavern behind the Exchange to meet with Cocke and Fenn and
did so, and dined with them, and after dinner had the intent of our
meeting, which was some private discourse with Fenn, telling him what I
hear and think of his business, which he takes very kindly and says he
will look about him. It was about his giving of ill language and answers
to people that come to him about money and some other particulars. This
morning Mrs. Barbary and little Mrs. Tooker went away homeward. Thence
my wife by coach calling me at White Hall to visit my Lady Carteret, and
she was not within. So to Westminster Hall, where I purposely tooke my
wife well dressed into the Hall to see and be seen; and, among others,
[met] Howlet’s daughter, who is newly married, and is she I call wife,
and one I love mightily. So to Broad Streete and there met my Lady and
Sir G. Carteret, and sat and talked with them a good while and so home,
and to my accounts which I cannot get through with. But at it till I
grew drowsy, and so to bed mightily vexed that I can come to no better
issue in my accounts.