11th. Up, and by water to Sir G. Downing’s, there to discourse with him
about the reliefe of the prisoners in Holland; which I did, and we do
resolve of the manner of sending them some. So I away by coach to St.
James’s, and there hear that the Duchesse is lately brought to bed of a
boy. By and by called to wait on the Duke, the King being present; and
there agreed, among other things, of the places to build the ten new
great ships ordered to be built, and as to the relief of prisoners in
Holland. And then about several stories of the basenesse of the King
of Spayne’s being served with officers: they in Flanders having as good
common men as any Prince in the world, but the veriest cowards for
the officers, nay for the generall officers, as the Generall and
Lieutenant-generall, in the whole world. But, above all things, the
King did speake most in contempt of the ceremoniousnesse of the King of
Spayne, that he do nothing but under some ridiculous form or other,
and will not piss but another must hold the chamber-pot. Thence to
Westminster Hall and there staid a while, and then to the Swan and
kissed Sarah, and so home to dinner, and after dinner out again to Sir
Robert Viner, and there did agree with him to accommodate some business
of tallys so as I shall get in near L2000 into my own hands, which is
in the King’s, upon tallys; which will be a pleasure to me, and
satisfaction to have a good sum in my own hands, whatever evil
disturbances should be in the State; though it troubles me to lose so
great a profit as the King’s interest of ten per cent. for that money.
Thence to Westminster, doing several things by the way, and there failed
of meeting Mrs. Lane, and so by coach took up my wife at her sister’s,
and so away to Islington, she and I alone, and so through Hackney, and
home late, our discourse being about laying up of some money safe in
prevention to the troubles I am afeard we may have in the state, and so
sleepy (for want of sleep the last night, going to bed late and rising
betimes in the morning) home, but when I come to the office, I there
met with a command from my Lord Arlington, to go down to a galliott at
Greenwich, by the King’s particular command, that is going to carry
the Savoy Envoye over, and we fear there may be many Frenchmen there
on board; and so I have a power and command to search for and seize all
that have not passes from one of the Secretarys of State, and to bring
them and their papers and everything else in custody some whither. So I
to the Tower, and got a couple of musquetiers with me, and Griffen and
my boy Tom and so down; and, being come, found none on board but two or
three servants, looking to horses and doggs, there on board, and, seeing
no more, I staid not long there, but away and on shore at Greenwich,
the night being late and the tide against us; so, having sent before, to
Mrs. Clerke’s and there I had a good bed, and well received, the whole
people rising to see me, and among the rest young Mrs. Daniel, whom I
kissed again and again alone, and so by and by to bed and slept pretty
well,