20th. Called up by Mr. Sheply, who is going into the country to-day to
Hinchingbroke, I sent my service to my Lady, and in general for newes:
that the world do think well of my Lord, and do wish he were here again,
but that the publique matters of the State as to the war are in the
worst condition that is possible. By and by Sir W. Warren, and with him
half an hour discoursing of several businesses, and some I hope will
bring me a little profit. He gone, and Sheply, I to the office a little,
and then to church, it being thanksgiving-day for the cessation of the
plague; but, Lord! how the towne do say that it is hastened before the
plague is quite over, there dying some people still,

     [According to the Bills of Mortality seven persons died in London of
     the plague during the week November 20th to 27th; and for some weeks
     after deaths continued from this cause.]

but only to get ground for plays to be publickly acted, which the
Bishops would not suffer till the plague was over; and one would thinke
so, by the suddenness of the notice given of the day, which was last
Sunday, and the little ceremony. The sermon being dull of Mr. Minnes,
and people with great indifferency come to hear him. After church home,
where I met Mr. Gregory, who I did then agree with to come to teach
my wife to play on the Viall, and he being an able and sober man, I am
mightily glad of it. He had dined, therefore went away, and I to dinner,
and after dinner by coach to Barkeshire-house, and there did get a very
great meeting; the Duke of York being there, and much business done,
though not in proportion to the greatness of the business, and my Lord
Chancellor sleeping and snoring the greater part of the time. Among
other things I declared the state of our credit as to tallys to raise
money by, and there was an order for payment of L5000 to Mr. Gawden, out
of which I hope to get something against Christmas. Here we sat late,
and here I did hear that there are some troubles like to be in Scotland,
there being a discontented party already risen, that have seized on the
Governor of Dumfreeze and imprisoned him,

     [William Fielding, writing to Sir Phil. Musgrave from Carlisle on