17th (Lord’s day). Being invited to Anthony Joyce’s to dinner, my wife
and sister and Mercer and I walked out in the morning, it being fine
weather, to Christ Church, and there heard a silly sermon, but sat where
we saw one of the prettiest little boys with the prettiest mouth that
ever I saw in [my] life. Thence to Joyce’s, where William Joyce and
his wife were, and had a good dinner; but, Lord! how sicke was I of
the company, only hope I shall have no more of it a good while; but am
invited to Will’s this week; and his wife, poor unhappy woman, cried to
hear me say that I could not be there, she thinking that I slight her:
so they got me to promise to come. Thence my father and I walked to
Gray’s Inne Fields, and there spent an houre or two walking and talking
of several businesses; first, as to his estate, he told me it produced
about L80 per ann., but then there goes L30 per. ann. taxes and other
things, certain charge, which I do promise to make good as far as this
L30, at which the poor man was overjoyed and wept. As to Pall he tells
me he is mightily satisfied with Ensum, and so I promised to give her
L500 presently, and to oblige myself to 100 more on the birth of her
first child, he insuring her in L10 per ann. for every L100, and in the
meantime till she do marry I promise to allow her L10 per ann. Then as
to John I tell him I will promise him nothing, but will supply him as so
much lent him, I declaring that I am not pleased with him yet, and that
when his degree is over I will send for him up hither, and if he be good
for any thing doubt not to get him preferment. This discourse ended to
the joy of my father and no less to me to see that I am able to do this,
we return to Joyce’s and there wanting a coach to carry us home I walked
out as far as the New Exchange to find one, but could not. So down to
the Milke-house, and drank three glasses of whay, and then up into the
Strand again, and there met with a coach, and so to Joyce’s and took up
my father, wife, sister, and Mercer, and to Islington, where we drank,
and then our tour by Hackney home, where, after a little, business at
my office and then talke with my Lady and Pegg Pen in the garden, I home
and to bed, being very weary.