15th. Called up, though a very rainy morning, by Sir H. Cholmley, and he
and I most of the morning together evening of accounts, which I was very
glad of. Then he and I out to Sir Robt. Viner’s, at the African house
(where I had not been since he come thither); but he was not there; but
I did some business with his people, and then to Colvill’s, who, I find,
lives now in Lyme Streete, and with the same credit as ever, this fire
having not done them any wrong that I hear of at all. Thence he and I
together to Westminster Hall, in our way talking of matters and passages
of state, the viciousness of the Court; the contempt the King brings
himself into thereby; his minding nothing, but doing all things just as
his people about him will have it; the Duke of York becoming a slave to
this whore Denham, and wholly minds her; that there really was amours
between the Duchesse and Sidney; a that there is reason to fear that, as
soon as the Parliament have raised this money, the King will see that
he hath got all that he can get, and then make up a peace. He tells me,
what I wonder at, but that I find it confirmed by Mr. Pierce, whom I met
by-and-by in the Hall, that Sir W. Coventry is of the caball with the
Duke of York, and Bruncker, with this Denham; which is a shame, and I
am sorry for it, and that Sir W. Coventry do make her visits; but yet I
hope it is not so. Pierce tells me, that as little agreement as there is
between the Prince--[Rupert]--and Duke of Albemarle, yet they are likely
to go to sea again; for the first will not be trusted alone, and nobody
will go with him but this Duke of Albemarle. He tells me much how all
the commanders of the fleete and officers that are sober men do cry
out upon their bad discipline, and the ruine that must follow it if it
continue. But that which I wonder most at, it seems their secretaries
have been the most exorbitant in their fees to all sorts of the people,
that it is not to be believed that they durst do it, so as it is
believed they have got L800 apiece by the very vacancies in the fleete.
He tells me that Lady Castlemayne is concluded to be with child again;
and that all the people about the King do make no scruple of saying
that the King do lie with Mrs. Stewart, who, he says, is a most
excellent-natured lady. This day the King begins to put on his vest, and
I did see several persons of the House of Lords and Commons too, great
courtiers, who are in it; being a long cassocke close to the body, of
black cloth, and pinked with white silke under it, and a coat over it,
and the legs ruffled with black riband like a pigeon’s leg; and, upon
the whole, I wish the King may keep it, for it is a very fine and
handsome garment.

     [Evelyn describes the new fashion as “a comely dress after ye
     Persian mode” (see “Diary,” October 18th, 1666).  He adds that he
     had described the “comelinesse and usefulnesse” of the Persian
     clothing in his pamphlet entitled “Tyrannus, or the Mode.”  “I do
     not impute to this discourse the change which soone happen’d, but
     it was an identity I could not but take notice of.”  Rugge, in his
     “Diurnal,” thus describes the new Court costume “1666, Oct. 11.  In
     this month His Majestie and whole Court changed the fashion of their
     clothes-viz. a close coat of cloth, pinkt with a white taffety under
     the cutts.  This in length reached the calf of the leg, and upon
     that a sercoat cutt at the breast, which hung loose and shorter than
     the vest six inches.  The breeches the Spanish cut, and buskins some
     of cloth, some of leather, but of the same colour as the vest or
     garment; of never the like fashion since William the Conqueror.”  It
     is represented in a portrait of Lord Arlington, by Sir P. Lely,
     formerly belonging to Lord de Clifford, and engraved in Lodge’s
     “Portraits.”  Louis XIV. ordered his servants to wear the dress.
     See November 22.]

Walking with Pierce in the Court of Wards out comes Sir W. Coventry, and
he and I talked of business. Among others I proposed the making Sir J.
Minnes a Commissioner, and make somebody else Comptroller. He tells me
it is the thing he hath been thinking of, and hath spoke to the Duke of
York of it. He believes it will be done; but that which I fear is that
Pen will be Comptroller, which I shall grudge a little. The Duke of
Buckingham called him aside and spoke a good while with him. I did
presently fear it might be to discourse something of his design to
blemish my Lord of Sandwich, in pursuance of the wild motion he made the
other day in the House. Sir W. Coventry, when he come to me again, told
me that he had wrought a miracle, which was, the convincing the Duke of
Buckingham that something--he did not name what--that he had intended
to do was not fit to be done, and that the Duke is gone away of that
opinion. This makes me verily believe it was something like what I
feared. By and by the House rose, and then we parted, and I with Sir G.
Carteret, and walked in the Exchequer Court, discoursing of businesses.
Among others, I observing to him how friendly Sir W. Coventry had
carried himself to him in these late inquiries, when, if he had borne
him any spleen, he could have had what occasion he pleased offered him,
he did confess he found the same thing, and would thanke him for it. I
did give him some other advices, and so away with him to his lodgings at
White Hall to dinner, where my Lady Carteret is, and mighty kind,
both of them, to me. Their son and my Lady Jemimah will be here very
speedily. She tells me the ladies are to go into a new fashion shortly,
and that is, to wear short coats, above their ancles; which she and I do
not like, but conclude this long trayne to be mighty graceful. But she
cries out of the vices of the Court, and how they are going to set up
plays already; and how, the next day after the late great fast, the
Duchesse of York did give the King and Queene a play. Nay, she told me
that they have heretofore had plays at Court the very nights before
the fast for the death of the late King: She do much cry out upon these
things, and that which she believes will undo the whole nation; and I
fear so too. After dinner away home, Mr. Brisband along with me as
far as the Temple, and there looked upon a new booke, set out by one
Rycault, secretary to my Lord Winchelsea, of the policy and customs of
the Turks, which is, it seems, much cried up. But I could not stay,
but home, where I find Balty come back, and with him some muster-books,
which I am glad of, and hope he will do me credit in his employment.
By and by took coach again and carried him home, and my wife to her
tailor’s, while I to White Hall to have found out Povy, but miss him and
so call in my wife and home again, where at Sir W. Batten’s I met Sir
W. Pen, lately come from the fleete at the Nore; and here were many good
fellows, among others Sir R. Holmes, who is exceeding kind to me, more
than usual, which makes me afeard of him, though I do much wish his
friendship. Thereupon, after a little stay, I withdrew, and to the
office and awhile, and then home to supper and to my chamber to settle
a few papers, and then to bed. This day the great debate was in
Parliament, the manner of raising the L1,800,000 they voted [the
King] on Friday; and at last, after many proposals, one moved that the
Chimney-money might be taken from the King, and an equal revenue of
something else might be found for the King, and people be enjoyned to
buy off this tax of Chimney-money for ever at eight years’ purchase,
which will raise present money, as they think, L1,600,000, and the State
be eased of an ill burthen and the King be supplied of something as food
or better for his use. The House seems to like this, and put off the
debate to to-morrow.