2nd. Up betimes, and knowing that my Lord Sandwich is come to towne with
the King and Duke, I to wait upon him, which I did, and find him in very
good humour, which I am glad to see with all my heart. Having received
his commands, and discoursed with some of his people about my Lord’s
going, and with Sir Roger Cuttance, who was there, and finds himself
slighted by Sir W. Coventry, I advised him however to look after
employment lest it should be said that my Lord’s friends do forsake the
service after he hath made them rich with the prizes. I to London, and
there among other things did look over some pictures at Cade’s for my
house, and did carry home a silver drudger

     [The dredger was probably the drageoir of France; in low Latin,
     dragerium, or drageria, in which comfits (dragdes) were kept.
     Roquefort says, “The ladies wore a little spice-box, in shape like a
     watch, to carry dragles, and it was called a drageoir.”  The custom
     continued certainly till the middle of the last century.  Old
     Palsgrave, in his “Eclaircissement de la Langue Francaise,” gives
     “dradge” as spice, rendering it by the French word dragde.  Chaucer
     says, of his Doctor of Physic, “Full ready hadde he his Apothecaries
     To send him dragges, and his lattuaries.”  The word sometimes may
     have signified the pounded condiments in which our forefathers
     delighted.  It is worth notice, that “dragge” was applied to a grain
     in the eastern counties, though not exclusively there, appearing to
     denote mixed grain.  Bishop Kennett tells us that “dredge mault is
     mault made up of oats, mixed with barley, of which they make an
     excellent, freshe, quiete sort of drinke, in Staffordshire.”  The
     dredger is still commonly used in our kitchen.--B.]

for my cupboard of plate, and did call for my silver chafing dishes, but
they are sent home, and the man would not be paid for them, saying that
he was paid for them already, and with much ado got him to tell me by
Mr. Wayth, but I would not accept of that, but will send him his money,
not knowing any courtesy I have yet done him to deserve it. So home, and
with my wife looked over our plate, and picked out L40 worth, I believe,
to change for more usefull plate, to our great content, and then we
shall have a very handsome cupboard of plate. So to dinner, and then to
the office, where we had a meeting extraordinary, about stating to the
Duke the present debts of the Navy, for which ready money must be had,
and that being done, I to my business, where late, and then home to
supper, and to bed.