7th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, where we attended as
usual the Duke of York and there was by the folly of Sir W. Batten
prevented in obtaining a bargain for Captain Cocke, which would, I
think have [been] at this time (during our great want of hempe), both
profitable to the King and of good convenience to me; but I matter
it not, it being done only by the folly, not any design, of Sir W.
Batten’s. Thence to Westminster Hall, and, it being fast day, there was
no shops open, but meeting with Doll Lane, did go with her to the Rose
taverne, and there drank and played with her a good while. She went
away, and I staid a good while after, and was seen going out by one of
our neighbours near the office and two of the Hall people that I had
no mind to have been seen by, but there was no hurt in it nor can be
alledged from it. Therefore I am not solicitous in it, but took coach
and called at Faythorne’s, to buy some prints for my wife to draw by
this winter, and here did see my Lady Castlemayne’s picture, done by him
from Lilly’s, in red chalke and other colours, by which he hath cut it
in copper to be printed. The picture in chalke is the finest thing I
ever saw in my life, I think; and did desire to buy it; but he says he
must keep it awhile to correct his copper-plate by, and when that is
done he will sell it me. Thence home and find my wife gone out with
my brother to see her brother. I to dinner and thence to my chamber to
read, and so to the office (it being a fast day and so a holiday), and
then to Mrs. Turner’s, at her request to speake and advise about Sir
Thomas Harvy’s coming to lodge there, which I think must be submitted
to, and better now than hereafter, when he gets more ground, for I
perceive he intends to stay by it, and begins to crow mightily upon
his late being at the payment of tickets; but a coxcombe he is and will
never be better in the business of the Navy. Thence home, and there find
Mr. Batelier come to bring my wife a very fine puppy of his mother’s
spaniel, a very fine one indeed, which my wife is mighty proud of. He
staid and supped with us, and they to cards. I to my chamber to do some
business, and then out to them to play and were a little merry, and then
to bed. By the Duke of York his discourse to-day in his chamber, they
have it at Court, as well as we here, that a fatal day is to be expected
shortly, of some great mischiefe to the remainder of this day; whether
by the Papists, or what, they are not certain. But the day is disputed;
some say next Friday, others a day sooner, others later, and I hope all
will prove a foolery. But it is observable how every body’s fears are
busy at this time.