30th. Up, and did some business in my chamber, then by and by comes my
boy’s Lute-Master, and I did direct him hereafter to begin to teach him
to play his part on the Theorbo, which he will do, and that in a little
time I believe. So to the office, and there with Sir W. Warren, with
whom I have spent no time a good while. We set right our business of the
Lighters, wherein I thinke I shall get L100. At noon home to dinner and
there did practise with Mercer one of my new tunes that I have got Dr.
Childe to set me a base to and it goes prettily. Thence abroad to pay
several debts at the end of the month, and so to Sir W. Coventry, at St.
James’s, where I find him in his new closett, which is very fine, and
well supplied with handsome books. I find him speak very slightly of
the late victory: dislikes their staying with the fleete up their coast,
believing that the Dutch will come out in fourteen days, and then we
with our unready fleete, by reason of some of the ships being maymed,
shall be in bad condition to fight them upon their owne coast: is much
dissatisfied with the great number of men, and their fresh demands of
twenty-four victualling ships, they going out but the other day as full
as they could stow. I asked him whether he did never desire an account
of the number of supernumeraries, as I have done several ways, without
which we shall be in great errour about the victuals; he says he has
done it again and again, and if any mistake should happen they must
thanke themselves. He spoke slightly of the Duke of Albemarle, saying,
when De Ruyter come to give him a broadside--“Now,” says he, chewing of
tobacco the while, “will this fellow come and give, me two broadsides,
and then he will run;” but it seems he held him to it two hours, till
the Duke himself was forced to retreat to refit, and was towed off, and
De Ruyter staid for him till he come back again to fight. One in the
ship saying to the Duke, “Sir, methinks De Ruyter hath given us more:
than two broadsides;”--“Well,” says the Duke, “but you shall find him
run by and by,” and so he did, says Sir W. Coventry; but after the Duke
himself had been first made to fall off. The Resolution had all brass
guns, being the same that Sir J. Lawson had in her in the Straights. It
is observed that the two fleetes were even in number to one ship. Thence
home; and to sing with my wife and Mercer in the garden; and coming in I
find my wife plainly dissatisfied with me, that I can spend so much time
with Mercer, teaching her to sing and could never take the pains with
her. Which I acknowledge; but it is because that the girl do take
musique mighty readily, and she do not, and musique is the thing of the
world that I love most, and all the pleasure almost that I can now take.
So to bed in some little discontent, but no words from me.