23rd. Up by 5 o’clock and to my chamber settling several matters in
order. So out toward White Hall, calling in my way on my Lord Bellassis,
where I come to his bedside, and did give me a full and long account
of his matters, how he left them at Tangier. Declares himself fully
satisfied with my care: seems cunningly to argue for encreasing the
number of men there. Told me the whole story of his gains by the Turky
prizes, which he owns he hath got about L5000 by. Promised me the same
profits Povy was to have had; and in fine, I find him a pretty subtle
man; and so I left him, and to White Hall before the Duke and did our
usual business, and eased my mind of two or three things of weight
that lay upon me about Lanyon’s salary, which I have got to be L150 per
annum. Thence to Westminster to look after getting some little for some
great tallys, but shall find trouble in it. Thence homeward and met with
Sir Philip Warwicke, and spoke about this, in which he is scrupulous.
After that to talk of the wants of the Navy. He lays all the fault now
upon the new Act, and owns his owne folly in thinking once so well of it
as to give way to others’ endeavours about it, and is grieved at heart
to see what passe things are like to come to. Thence to the Excise
Office to the Commissioners to get a meeting between them and myself and
others about our concernments in the Excise for Tangier, and so to the
‘Change awhile, and thence home with Creed, and find my wife at dinner
with Mr. Cooke, who is going down to Hinchinbrooke. After dinner
Creed and I and wife and Mercer out by coach, leaving them at the New
Exchange, while I to White Hall, and there staid at Sir G. Carteret’s
chamber till the Council rose, and then he and I, by agreement this
morning, went forth in his coach by Tiburne, to the Parke; discoursing
of the state of the Navy as to money, and the state of the Kingdom too,
how ill able to raise more: and of our office as to the condition of the
officers; he giving me caution as to myself, that there are those that
are my enemies as well as his, and by name my Lord Bruncker, who hath
said some odd speeches against me. So that he advises me to stand on my
guard; which I shall do, and unless my too-much addiction to pleasure
undo me, will be acute enough for any of them. We rode to and again
in the Parke a good while, and at last home and set me down at Charing
Crosse, and thence I to Mrs. Pierces to take up my wife and Mercer,
where I find her new picture by Hales do not please her, nor me indeed,
it making no show, nor is very like, nor no good painting. Home to
supper and to bed, having my right eye sore and full of humour of late,
I think, by my late change of my brewer, and having of 8s. beer.