29th. Up, and to Court by coach, where to Council before the Duke of
Yorke, the Duke of Albemarle with us, and after Sir W. Coventry had gone
over his notes that he had provided with the Duke of Albemarle, I went
over all mine with good successe, only I fear I did once offend the Duke
of Albemarle, but I was much joyed to find the Duke of Yorke so much
contending for my discourse about the pursers against Sir W. Pen, who
opposes it like a foole; my Lord Sandwich come in in the middle of the
business, and, poor man, very melancholy, methought, and said little at
all, or to the business, and sat at the lower end, just as he come, no
roome being made for him, only I did give him my stoole, and another was
reached me. After council done, I walked to and again up and down the
house, discoursing with this and that man. Among others tooke occasion
to thanke the Duke of Yorke for his good opinion in general of my
service, and particularly his favour in conferring on me the Victualling
business. He told me that he knew nobody so fit as I for it, and next,
he was very glad to find that to give me for my encouragement, speaking
very kindly of me. So to Sir W. Coventry’s to dinner with him, whom I
took occasion to thanke for his favour and good thoughts of what little
service I did, desiring he would do the last act of friendship in
telling me of my faults also. He told me he would be sure he would do
that also, if there were any occasion for it. So that as much as it is
possible under so great a fall of my Lord Sandwich’s, and difference
between them, I may conclude that I am thoroughly right with Sir W.
Coventry. I dined with him with a great deale of company, and much merry
discourse. I was called away before dinner ended to go to my company who
dined at our lodgings. Thither I went with Mr. Evelyn (whom I met)
in his coach going that way, but finding my company gone, but my Lord
Bruncker left his coach for me; so Mr. Evelyn and I into my Lord’s
coach, and rode together with excellent discourse till we come to
Clapham, talking of the vanity and vices of the Court, which makes it
a most contemptible thing; and indeed in all his discourse I find him a
most worthy person. Particularly he entertained me with discourse of
an Infirmary, which he hath projected for the sick and wounded seamen
against the next year, which I mightily approve of; and will endeavour
to promote it, being a worthy thing, and of use, and will save money. He
set me down at Mr. Gawden’s, where nobody yet come home, I having left
him and his sons and Creed at Court, so I took a book and into the
gardens, and there walked and read till darke with great pleasure, and
then in and in comes Osborne, and he and I to talk of Mr. Jaggard, who
comes from London, and great hopes there is of a decrease this week also
of the plague. Anon comes in Creed, and after that Mr. Gawden and his
sons, and then they bringing in three ladies, who were in the house,
but I do not know them, his daughter and two nieces, daughters of Dr.
Whistler’s, with whom and Creed mighty sport at supper, the ladies very
pretty and mirthfull. I perceive they know Creed’s gut and stomach as
well as I, and made as much mirthe as I with it at supper. After supper
I made the ladies sing, and they have been taught, but, Lord! though I
was forced to commend them, yet it was the saddest stuff I ever heard.
However, we sat up late, and then I, in the best chamber like a prince,
to bed, and Creed with me, and being sleepy talked but little.