7th. Up betimes, and to my office about business (Sir W. Coventry having
sent me word that he is gone down to the fleete to see how matters
stand, and to be back again speedily); and with the same expectation of
congratulating ourselves with the victory that I had yesterday. But my
Lord Bruncker and Sir T. H. that come from Court, tell me quite contrary
newes, which astonishes me: that is to say, that we are beaten, lost
many ships and good commanders; have not taken one ship of the enemy’s;
and so can only report ourselves a victory; nor is it certain that we
were left masters of the field. But, above all, that The Prince run on
shore upon the Galloper, and there stuck; was endeavoured to be fetched
off by the Dutch, but could not; and so they burned her; and Sir G.
Ascue is taken prisoner, and carried into Holland. This newes do much
trouble me, and the thoughts of the ill consequences of it, and the
pride and presumption that brought us to it. At noon to the ‘Change, and
there find the discourse of towne, and their countenances much changed;
but yet not very plain. So home to dinner all alone, my father and
people being gone all to Woolwich to see the launching of the new ship
The Greenwich, built by Chr. Pett. I left alone with little Mrs. Tooker,
whom I kept with me in my chamber all the afternoon, and did what I
would with her. By and by comes Mr. Wayth to me; and discoursing of our
ill successe, he tells me plainly from Captain Page’s own mouth (who
hath lost his arm in the fight), that the Dutch did pursue us two hours
before they left us, and then they suffered us to go on homewards, and
they retreated towards their coast: which is very sad newes. Then to
my office and anon to White Hall, late, to the Duke of York to see what
commands he hath and to pray a meeting to-morrow for Tangier in behalf
of Mr. Yeabsly, which I did do and do find the Duke much damped in his
discourse, touching the late fight, and all the Court talk sadly of it.
The Duke did give me several letters he had received from the fleete,
and Sir W. Coventry and Sir W. Pen, who are gone down thither, for me to
pick out some works to be done for the setting out the fleete again;
and so I took them home with me, and was drawing out an abstract of them
till midnight. And as to newes, I do find great reason to think that we
are beaten in every respect, and that we are the losers. The Prince upon
the Galloper, where both the Royall Charles and Royall Katharine had
come twice aground, but got off. The Essex carried into Holland; the
Swiftsure missing (Sir William Barkeley) ever since the beginning of
the fight. Captains Bacon, Tearne, Wood, Mootham, Whitty, and Coppin,
slayne. The Duke of Albemarle writes, that he never fought with worse
officers in his life, not above twenty of them behaving themselves like
men. Sir William Clerke lost his leg; and in two days died. The Loyall
George, Seven Oakes, and Swiftsure, are still missing, having never,
as the Generall writes himself, engaged with them. It was as great an
alteration to find myself required to write a sad letter instead of a
triumphant one to my Lady Sandwich this night, as ever on any occasion I
had in my life. So late home and to bed.