7th. Up betimes, and to St. James’s, thinking Mr. Coventry had lain
there; but he do not, but at White Hall; so thither I went and had as
good a time as heart could wish, and after an houre in his chamber about
publique business he and I walked up, and the Duke being gone abroad we
walked an houre in the Matted Gallery: he of himself begun to discourse
of the unhappy differences between him and my Lord of Sandwich, and from
the beginning to the end did run through all passages wherein my Lord
hath, at any time, gathered any dissatisfaction, and cleared himself to
me most honourably; and in truth, I do believe he do as he says. I did
afterwards purge myself of all partiality in the business of Sir G.
Carteret, (whose story Sir W. Coventry did also run over,) that I do
mind the King’s interest, notwithstanding my relation to him; all
which he declares he firmly believes, and assures me he hath the same
kindnesse and opinion of me as ever. And when I said I was jealous of
myself, that having now come to such an income as I am, by his favour,
I should not be found to do as much service as might deserve it; he did
assure me, he thinks it not too much for me, but thinks I deserve it as
much as any man in England. All this discourse did cheer my heart, and
sets me right again, after a good deal of melancholy, out of fears of
his disinclination to me, upon the differences with my Lord Sandwich and
Sir G. Carteret; but I am satisfied throughly, and so went away quite
another man, and by the grace of God will never lose it again by my
folly in not visiting and writing to him, as I used heretofore to do.
Thence by coach to the Temple, and it being a holyday, a fast-day, there
‘light, and took water, being invited, and down to Greenwich, to Captain
Cocke’s, where dined, he and Lord Bruncker, and Matt. Wren, Boltele, and
Major Cooper, who is also a very pretty companion; but they all drink
hard, and, after dinner, to gaming at cards. So I provoked my Lord to be
gone, and he and I to Mr. Cottle’s and met Mrs. Williams (without whom
he cannot stir out of doors) and there took coach and away home. They
carry me to London and set me down at the Temple, where my mind changed
and I home, and to writing and heare my boy play on the lute, and a
turne with my wife pleasantly in the garden by moonshine, my heart being
in great peace, and so home to supper and to bed. The King and Duke are
to go to-morrow to Audly End, in order to the seeing and buying of it of
my Lord Suffolke.