26th. Up, and to my chamber to do some business. Then to speak with
several people, among others with Mrs. Burroughs, whom I appointed to
meet me at the New Exchange in the afternoon. I by water to Westminster,
and there to enquire after my tallies, which I shall get this week.
Thence to the Swan, having sent for some burnt claret, and there by
and by comes Doll Lane, and she and I sat and drank and talked a great
while, among other things about her sister’s being brought to bed, and
I to be godfather to the girle. I did tumble Doll, and do almost what
I would with her, and so parted, and I took coach, and to the New
Exchange, buying a neat’s tongue by the way, thinking to eat it out of
town, but there I find Burroughs in company of an old woman, an aunt of
hers, whom she could not leave for half an hour. So after buying a few
baubles to while away time, I down to Westminster, and there into the
House of Parliament, where, at a great Committee, I did hear, as long
as I would, the great case against my Lord Mordaunt, for some arbitrary
proceedings of his against one Taylor, whom he imprisoned, and did all
the violence to imaginable, only to get him to give way to his abusing
his daughter. Here was Mr. Sawyer, my old chamber-fellow, a counsel
against my Lord; and I am glad to see him in so good play. Here I met,
before the committee sat, with my cozen Roger Pepys, the first time I
have spoke with him this parliament. He hath promised to come, and bring
Madam Turner with him, who is come to towne to see the City, but hath
lost all her goods of all kinds in Salisbury Court, Sir William Turner
having not endeavoured, in her absence, to save one penny, to dine with
me on Friday next, of which I am glad. Roger bids me to help him to some
good rich widow; for he is resolved to go, and retire wholly, into
the country; for, he says, he is confident we shall be all ruined very
speedily, by what he sees in the State, and I am much in his mind.
Having staid as long as I thought fit for meeting of Burroughs, I away
and to the ‘Change again, but there I do not find her now, I having
staid too long at the House, and therefore very hungry, having eat
nothing to-day. Home, and there to eat presently, and then to the office
a little, and to Sir W. Batten, where Sir J. Minnes and Captain Cocke
was; but no newes from the North at all to-day; and the newes-book makes
the business nothing, but that they are all dispersed. I pray God it may
prove so. So home, and, after a little, to my chamber to bed.