28th. Up, and in my new closet a good while doing business. Then called
on Mrs. Martin and Burroughs of Westminster about business of the
former’s husband. Which done, I to the office, where we sat all the
morning. At noon I, with my wife and Mercer, to Philpott Lane, a great
cook’s shop, to the wedding of Mr. Longracke, our purveyor, a good,
sober, civil man, and hath married a sober, serious mayde. Here I met
much ordinary company, I going thither at his great request; but there
was Mr. Madden and his lady, a fine, noble, pretty lady, and he, and a
fine gentleman seems to be. We four were most together; but the whole
company was very simple and innocent. A good-dinner, and, what was best,
good musique. After dinner the young women went to dance; among others
Mr. Christopher Pett his daughter, who is a very pretty, modest girle,
I am mightily taken with her; and that being done about five o’clock,
home, very well pleased with the afternoon’s work. And so we broke up
mightily civilly, the bride and bridegroom going to Greenwich (they
keeping their dinner here only for my sake) to lie, and we home, where I
to the office, and anon am on a sudden called to meet Sir W. Pen and Sir
W. Coventry at the Victualling Office, which did put me out of order to
be so surprised. But I went, and there Sir William Coventry did read me
a letter from the Generalls to the King,

     [The letter from Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle to the king
     (dated August 27th, from the “Royal Charles,” Sole Bay) is among the
     State Papers.  The generals complain of the want of supplies, in
     spite of repeated importunities.  The demands are answered by
     accounts from Mr. Pepys of what has been sent to the fleet, which
     will not satisfy the ships, unless the provisions could be found
     “...  Have not a month’s provision of beer, yet Sir Wm. Coventry
     assures the ministers that they are supplied till Oct. 3; unless
     this is quickened they will have to return home too soon....
     Want provisions according to their own computation, not Sir Wm.
     Coventry’s, to last to the end of October” (“Calendar,” 1666-67, p.