8th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon
home to dinner, and there find Mr. Pierce and his wife and Betty, a
pretty girle, who in discourse at table told me the great Proviso passed
the House of Parliament yesterday; which makes the King and Court
mad, the King having given order to my Lord Chamberlain to send to the
playhouses and bawdy houses, to bid all the Parliament-men that were
there to go to the Parliament presently. This is true, it seems; but it
was carried against the Court by thirty or forty voices. It is a Proviso
to the Poll Bill, that there shall be a Committee of nine persons that
shall have the inspection upon oath, and power of giving others, of all
the accounts of the money given and spent for this warr. This hath a
most sad face, and will breed very ill blood. He tells me, brought in
by Sir Robert Howard, who is one of the King’s servants, at least hath
a great office, and hath got, they say, L20,000 since the King come in.
Mr. Pierce did also tell me as a great truth, as being told it by Mr.
Cowly, who was by, and heard it, that Tom Killigrew should publiquely
tell the King that his matters were coming into a very ill state; but
that yet there was a way to help all, which is, says he, “There is a
good, honest, able man, that I could name, that if your Majesty would
employ, and command to see all things well executed, all things would
soon be mended; and this is one Charles Stuart, who now spends his time
in employing his lips.... about the Court, and hath no other employment;
but if you would give him this employment, he were the fittest man in
the world to perform it.” This, he says, is most true; but the King do
not profit by any of this, but lays all aside, and remembers nothing,
but to his pleasures again; which is a sorrowful consideration. Very
good company we were at dinner, and merry, and after dinner, he being
gone about business, my wife and I and Mrs. Pierce and Betty and Balty,
who come to see us to-day very sick, and went home not well, together
out, and our coach broke the wheel off upon Ludgate Hill. So we were
fain to part ourselves and get room in other people’s coaches, and Mrs.
Pierce and I in one, and I carried her home and set her down, and myself
to the King’s playhouse, which troubles me since, and hath cost me a
forfeit of 10s., which I have paid, and there did see a good part of
“The English Monsieur,” which is a mighty pretty play, very witty and
pleasant. And the women do very well; but, above all, little Nelly; that
I am mightily pleased with the play, and much with the House, more than
ever I expected, the women doing better than ever I expected, and very
fine women. Here I was in pain to be seen, and hid myself; but, as God
would have it, Sir John Chichly come, and sat just by me. Thence to Mrs.
Pierce’s, and there took up my wife and away home, and to the office
and Sir W. Batten’s, of whom I hear that this Proviso in Parliament is
mightily ill taken by all the Court party as a mortal blow, and that,
that strikes deep into the King’s prerogative, which troubles me
mightily. Home, and set some papers right in my chamber, and then to
supper and to bed, we being in much fear of ill news of our colliers. A
fleete of two hundred sail, and fourteen Dutch men-of-war between them
and us and they coming home with small convoy; and the City in great
want, coals being at L3 3s. per chaldron, as I am told. I saw smoke in
the ruines this very day.