6th. Up betimes and by water to the Cockepitt, there met Sir G. Carteret
and, after discourse with the Duke, all together, and there saw a letter
wherein Sir W. Coventry did take notice to the Duke with a commendation
of my paper about Pursers, I to walke in the Parke with the
Vice-Chamberlain, and received his advice about my deportment about the
advancing the credit of the Act; giving me caution to see that we do not
misguide the King by making them believe greater matters from it than
will be found. But I see that this arises from his great trouble to see
the Act succeede, and to hear my name so much used and my letters shown
at Court about goods served us in upon the credit of it. But I do make
him believe that I do it with all respect to him and on his behalfe too,
as indeed I do, as well as my owne, that it may not be said that he or
I do not assist therein. He tells me that my Lord Sandwich do proceed
on his journey with the greatest kindnesse that can be imagined from
the King and Chancellor, which was joyfull newes to me. Thence with Lord
Bruncker to Greenwich by water to a great dinner and much company; Mr.
Cottle and his lady and others and I went, hoping to get Mrs. Knipp to
us, having wrote a letter to her in the morning, calling myself “Dapper
Dicky,” in answer to hers of “Barbary Allen,” but could not, and am told
by the boy that carried my letter, that he found her crying; but I fear
she lives a sad life with that ill-natured fellow her husband: so we had
a great, but I a melancholy dinner, having not her there, as I hoped.
After dinner to cards, and then comes notice that my wife is come
unexpectedly to me to towne. So I to her. It is only to see what I do,
and why I come not home; and she is in the right that I would have a
little more of Mrs. Knipp’s company before I go away. My wife to fetch
away my things from Woolwich, and I back to cards and after cards to
choose King and Queene, and a good cake there was, but no marks found;
but I privately found the clove, the mark of the knave, and privately
put it into Captain Cocke’s piece, which made some mirthe, because of
his lately being knowne by his buying of clove and mace of the East
India prizes. At night home to my lodging, where I find my wife returned
with my things, and there also Captain Ferrers is come upon business of
my Lord’s to this town about getting some goods of his put on board in
order to his going to Spain, and Ferrers presumes upon my finding a bed
for him, which I did not like to have done without my invitation because
I had done [it] several times before, during the plague, that he could
not provide himself safely elsewhere. But it being Twelfth Night, they
had got the fiddler and mighty merry they were; and I above come not
to them, but when I had done my business among my papers went to bed,
leaving them dancing, and choosing King and Queene.