17th. Up and betimes with Captain Erwin down by water to Woolwich, I
walking alone from Greenwich thither, making an end of the “Adventures
of Five Hours,” which when all is done is the best play that ever I read
in my life. Being come thither I did some business there and at the Rope
Yarde, and had a piece of bride-cake sent me by Mrs. Barbary into the
boate after me, she being here at her uncle’s, with her husband, Mr.
Wood’s son, the mast-maker, and mighty nobly married, they say, she
was, very fine, and he very rich, a strange fortune for so odd a looked
mayde, though her hands and body be good, and nature very good, I think.
Back with Captain Erwin, discoursing about the East Indys, where he
hath often been. And among other things he tells me how the King of Syam
seldom goes out without thirty or forty thousand people with him, and
not a word spoke, nor a hum or cough in the whole company to be heard.
He tells me the punishment frequently there for malefactors is cutting
off the crowne of their head, which they do very dexterously, leaving
their brains bare, which kills them presently. He told me what I
remember he hath once done heretofore: that every body is to lie flat
down at the coming by of the King, and nobody to look upon him upon pain
of death. And that he and his fellows, being strangers, were invited to
see the sport of taking of a wild elephant, and they did only kneel, and
look toward the King. Their druggerman did desire them to fall down,
for otherwise he should suffer for their contempt of the King. The
sport being ended, a messenger comes from the King, which the druggerman
thought had been to have taken away his life; but it was to enquire how
the strangers liked the sport. The druggerman answered that they did cry
it up to be the best that ever they saw, and that they never heard of
any Prince so great in every thing as this King. The messenger being
gone back, Erwin and his company asked their druggerman what he had
said, which he told them. “But why,” say they, “would you say that
without our leave, it being not true?”--“It is no matter for that,” says
he, “I must have said it, or have been hanged, for our King do not live
by meat, nor drink, but by having great lyes told him.” In our way back
we come by a little vessel that come into the river this morning, and
says he left the fleete in Sole Bay, and that he hath not heard (he
belonging to Sir W. Jenings, in the fleete) of any such prizes taken as
the ten or twelve I inquired about, and said by Sir W. Batten yesterday
to be taken, so I fear it is not true. So to Westminster, and there, to
my great content, did receive my L2000 of Mr. Spicer’s telling, which I
was to receive of Colvill, and brought it home with me [to] my house by
water, and there I find one of my new presses for my books brought home,
which pleases me mightily. As, also, do my wife’s progresse upon her
head that she is making. So to dinner, and thence abroad with my wife,
leaving her at Unthanke’s; I to White Hall, waiting at the Council door
till it rose, and there spoke with Sir W. Coventry, who and I do much
fear our Victuallers, they having missed the fleete in their going. But
Sir W. Coventry says it is not our fault, but theirs, if they have
not left ships to secure them. This he spoke in a chagrin sort of way,
methought. After a little more discourse of several businesses, I away
homeward, having in the gallery the good fortune to see Mrs. Stewart,
who is grown a little too tall, but is a woman of most excellent
features. The narrative of the late expedition in burning the ships is
in print, and makes it a great thing, and I hope it is so. So took up my
wife and home, there I to the office, and thence with Sympson the joyner
home to put together the press he hath brought me for my books this day,
which pleases me exceedingly. Then to Sir W. Batten’s, where Sir Richard
Ford did very understandingly, methought, give us an account of the
originall of the Hollands Bank,

     [This bank at Amsterdam is referred to in a tract entitled “An
     Appeal to Caesar,” 1660, p. 22.  In 1640 Charles I. seized the money
     in the mint in the Tower entrusted to the safe keeping of the Crown.
     It was the practice of the London goldsmiths at this time to allow
     interest at the rate of six or eight per cent. on money deposited
     with them (J. Biddulph Martin, “The Grasshopper in Lombard Street,”