24th. Up, and down to the Old Swan, and there find little Michell come
to his new shop that he hath built there in the room of his house that
was burned. I hope he will do good here. I drank and bade him joy, for
I love him and his wife well, him for his care, and her for her person,
and so to White Hall, where we attended the Duke; and to all our
complaints for want of money, which now we are tired out with making,
the Duke only tells us that he is sorry for it, and hath spoke to the
King of it, and money we shall have as soon as it can be found; and
though all the issue of the war lies upon it, yet that is all the
answer we can get, and that is as bad or worse than nothing. Thence to
Westminster Hall, where the term is begun, and I did take a turn or two,
and so away by coach to Sir R. Viner’s, and there received some money,
and then home and to dinner. After dinner to little business, and
then abroad with my wife, she to see her brother, who is sick, and she
believes is from some discontent his wife hath given him by her loose
carriage, which he is told, and he hath found has been very suspicious
in his absence, which I am sorry for. I to the Hall and there walked
long, among others talking with Mr. Hayes, Prince Rupert’s Secretary,
a very ingenious man, and one, I think, fit to contract some friendship
with. Here I staid late, walking to and again, hearing how the
Parliament proceeds, which is mighty slowly in the settling of the money
business, and great factions growing every day among them. I am told
also how Holmes did last Sunday deliver in his articles to the King and
Cabinet against [Sir Jeremy] Smith, and that Smith hath given in his
answer, and lays his not accompanying the fleete to his pilot, who would
not undertake to carry the ship further; which the pilot acknowledges.
The thing is not accommodated, but only taken up, and both sides
commanded to be quiet; but no peace like to be. The Duke of Albemarle is
Smith’s friend, and hath publiquely swore that he would never go to sea
again unless Holmes’s commission were taken from him.

     [In the instructions given to Sir Thomas Clifford (August 5th, 1666)
     to be communicated to Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle, we
     read: “to tell them that the complaint of Sir Jeremy Smith’s
     misbehaviour in the late engagement being so universal, unless he
     have fully satisfied the generals he should be brought to trial by
     court-martial, and there purged or condemned.”  The Duke of
     Albemarle answered the king (August 14th?): “Wishes to clear a
     gallant man falsely accused, Sir Jeremiah Smith, who had more men
     killed and hurt, and his ship received more shot than any in the
     fleet.  There is not a more spirited man serves in the fleet” On