13th. Up, and when ready, to the office (my wife rising to send away
Barker, according to our resolution last night, and she did do it with
more clothes than have cost us L10, and 20s. in her purse, which I did
for the respect I bear Mr. Falconbridge, otherwise she had not deserved
half of it, but I am the more willing to do it to be rid of one that
made work and trouble in the house, and had not qualities of any honour
or pleasure to me or my family, but what is a strange thing did always
declare to her mistress and others that she had rather be put
to drudgery and to wash the house than to live as she did like a
gentlewoman), and there I and Gibson all the morning making an end of my
report against Carcasse, which I think will do our business, but it is
a horrid shame such a rogue should give me and all of us this trouble.
This morning come Sir H. Cholmly to me for a tally or two; and tells me
that he hears that we are by agreement to give the King of France Nova
Scotia, which he do not like: but I do not know the importance of it.

     [Nova Scotia and the adjoining countries were called by the French
     Acadie.  Pepys is not the only official personage whose ignorance of
     Nova Scotia is on record.  A story is current of a prime minister
     (Duke of Newcastle) who was surprised at hearing Cape Breton was an
     island.  “Egad, I’ll go tell the King Cape Breton is an island!”
      Of the same it is said, that when told Annapolis was in danger, and
     ought to be defended: “Oh! certainly Annapolis must be defended,--
     where is Annapolis?”--B.]

Then abroad with my wife to my Lord Treasurer’s, and she to her
tailor’s. I find Sir Philip Warwicke, who I perceive do give over my
Lord Treasurer for a man of this world, his pain being grown great again
upon him, and all the rest he hath is by narcotiques, and now Sir Philip
Warwicke do please himself, like a good man, to tell some of the good
ejaculations of my Lord Treasurer concerning the little worth of this
world, to buy it with so much pain, and other things fit for a dying
man. So finding no business likely to be done here for Tangier, I having
a warrant for tallies to be signed, I away to the New Exchange, and
there staid a little, and then to a looking-glass shop to consult about
covering the wall in my closet over my chimney, which is darkish, with
looking-glasses, and then to my wife’s tailor’s, but find her not ready
to go home, but got to buy things, and so I away home to look after
my business and finish my report of Carcasse, and then did get Sir W.
Batten, Sir J. Minnes, and [Sir] W. Pen together, and read it over with
all the many papers relating to the business, which they do wonder at,
and the trouble I have taken about it, and like the report, so as that
they do unanimously resolve to sign it, and stand by it, and after a
great deal of discourse of the strange deportment of my Lord Bruncker in
this business to withstand the whole board in behalf of such an impudent
rogue as this is, I parted, and home to my wife, and supped and talked
with her, and then to bed, resolving to rise betimes to-morrow to write
fair the report.