16th. Up, and by coach to White Hall, and there to the Duke of York as
usual. Here Sir W. Coventry come to me aside in the Duke’s chamber, to
tell that he had not answered part of a late letter of mine, because
‘littera scripta manet’. About his leaving the office, he tells me, [it
is] because he finds that his business at Court will not permit him to
attend it; and then he confesses that he seldom of late could come from
it with satisfaction, and therefore would not take the King’s money for
nothing. I professed my sorrow for it, and prayed the continuance of his
favour; which he promised. I do believe he hath [done] like a very wise
man in reference to himself; but I doubt it will prove ill for the King,
and for the office. Prince Rupert, I hear to-day, is very ill; yesterday
given over, but better to-day. This day, before the Duke of York, the
business of the Muster-Masters was reported, and Balty found the best of
the whole number, so as the Duke enquired who he was, and whether he was
a stranger by his two names, both strange, and offered that he and one
more, who hath done next best, should have not only their owne, but part
of the others’ salary, but that I having said he was my brother-in-law,
he did stop, but they two are ordered their pay, which I am glad of, and
some of the rest will lose their pay, and others be laid by the heels.
I was very glad of this being ended so well. I did also, this morning,
move in a business wherein Mr. Hater hath concerned me, about getting a
ship, laden with salt from France, permitted to unload, coming in after
the King’s declaration was out, which I have hopes by some dexterity
to get done. Then with the Duke of York to the King, to receive his
commands for stopping the sale this day of some prize-goods at the
Prize-Office, goods fit for the Navy; and received the King’s commands,
and carried them to the Lords’ House, to my Lord Ashly, who was angry
much thereat, and I am sorry it fell to me to carry the order, but I
cannot help it. So, against his will, he signed a note I writ to the
Commissioners of Prizes, which I carried and delivered to Kingdone, at
their new office in Aldersgate Streete. Thence a little to the Exchange,
where it was hot that the Prince was dead, but I did rectify it. So
home to dinner, and found Balty, told him the good news, and then after
dinner away, I presently to White Hall, and did give the Duke of York a
memorial of the salt business, against the Council, and did wait all
the Council for answer, walking a good while with Sir Stephen Fox, who,
among other things, told me his whole mystery in the business of the
interest he pays as Treasurer for the Army. They give him 12d. per
pound quite through the Army, with condition to be paid weekly. This he
undertakes upon his own private credit, and to be paid by the King at
the end of every four months. If the King pay him not at the end of the
four months, then, for all the time he stays longer, my Lord Treasurer,
by agreement, allows him eight per cent. per annum for the forbearance.
So that, in fine, he hath about twelve per cent. from the King and the
Army, for fifteen or sixteen months’ interest; out of which he gains
soundly, his expense being about L130,000 per annum; and hath no trouble
in it, compared, as I told him, to the trouble I must have to bring in
an account of interest. I was, however, glad of being thus enlightened,
and so away to the other council door, and there got in and hear a piece
of a cause, heard before the King, about a ship deserted by her fellows
(who were bound mutually to defend each other), in their way to
Virginy, and taken by the enemy, but it was but meanly pleaded. Then all
withdrew, and by and by the Council rose, and I spoke with the Duke of
York, and he told me my business was done, which I found accordingly in
Sir Edward Walker’s books. And so away, mightily satisfied, to Arundell
House, and there heard a little good discourse, and so home, and there
to Sir W. Batten, where I heard the examinations in two of our prizes,
which do make but little for us, so that I do begin to doubt their
proving prize, which troubled me. So home to supper with my wife, and
after supper my wife told me how she had moved to W. Hewer the
business of my sister for a wife to him, which he received with mighty
acknowledgements, as she says, above anything; but says he hath no
intention to alter his condition: so that I am in some measure sorry she
ever moved it; but I hope he will think it only come from her. So after
supper a little to the office, to enter my journall, and then home to
bed. Talk there is of a letter to come from Holland, desiring a place of
treaty; but I do doubt it. This day I observe still, in many places, the
smoking remains of the late fire: the ways mighty bad and dirty. This
night Sir R. Ford told me how this day, at Christ Church Hospital,
they have given a living over L200 per annum to Mr. Sanchy, my old
acquaintance, which I wonder at, he commending him mightily; but am glad
of it. He tells me, too, how the famous Stillingfleete was a Bluecoat
boy. The children at this day are provided for in the country by the
House, which I am glad also to hear.