April 1st. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes in his coach, set him down at the
Treasurer’s Office in Broad-streete, and I in his coach to White Hall,
and there had the good fortune to walk with Sir W. Coventry into the
garden, and there read our melancholy letter to the Duke of York, which
he likes. And so to talk: and he flatly owns that we must have a peace,
for we cannot set out a fleete; and, to use his own words, he fears that
we shall soon have enough of fighting in this new way, which we have
thought on for this year. He bemoans the want of money, and discovers
himself jealous that Sir G. Carteret do not look after, or concern
himself for getting, money as he used to do, and did say it is true if
Sir G. Carteret would only do his work, and my Lord Treasurer would do
his own, Sir G. Carteret hath nothing to do to look after money, but
if he will undertake my Lord Treasurer’s work to raise money of the
Bankers, then people must expect that he will do it, and did further
say, that he [Carteret] and my Lord Chancellor do at this very day
labour all they can to villify this new way of raising money, and making
it payable, as it now is, into the Exchequer; and expressly said that
in pursuance hereof, my Lord Chancellor hath prevailed with the King, in
the close of his last speech to the House, to say, that he did hope
to see them come to give money as it used to be given, without so many
provisos, meaning, as Sir W. Coventry says, this new method of the Act.
While we were talking, there come Sir Thomas Allen with two ladies; one
of which was Mrs. Rebecca Allen, that I knew heretofore, the clerk of
the rope-yard’s daughter at Chatham, who, poor heart! come to desire
favour for her husband, who is clapt up, being a Lieutenant [Jowles],
for sending a challenge to his Captain, in the most saucy, base language
that could be writ. I perceive [Sir] W. Coventry is wholly resolved
to bring him to punishment; for, “bear with this,” says he, “and no
discipline shall ever be expected.” She in this sad condition took no
notice of me, nor I of her. So away we to the Duke of York, and there in
his closett [Sir] W. Coventry and I delivered the letter, which the Duke
of York made not much of, I thought, as to laying it to heart, as the
matter deserved, but did promise to look after the getting of money for
us, and I believe Sir W. Coventry will add what force he can to it. I
did speak to [Sir] W. Coventry about Balty’s warrant, which is ready,
and about being Deputy Treasurer, which he very readily and friendlily
agreed to, at which I was glad, and so away and by coach back to
Broad-streete to Sir G. Carteret’s, and there found my brother passing
his accounts, which I helped till dinner, and dined there, and many good
stories at dinner, among others about discoveries of murder, and Sir J.
Minnes did tell of the discovery of his own great-grandfather’s murder,
fifteen years after he was murdered. Thence, after dinner, home and by
water to Redriffe, and walked (fine weather) to Deptford, and there did
business and so back again, walked, and pleased with a jolly femme that
I saw going and coming in the way, which je could avoir been contented
pour avoir staid with if I could have gained acquaintance con elle, but
at such times as these I am at a great loss, having not confidence, no
alcune ready wit. So home and to the office, where late, and then home
to supper and bed. This evening Mrs. Turner come to my office, and did
walk an hour with me in the garden, telling me stories how Sir
Edward Spragge hath lately made love to our neighbour, a widow, Mrs.
Hollworthy, who is a woman of estate, and wit and spirit, and do contemn
him the most, and sent him away with the greatest scorn in the world;
she tells me also odd stories how the parish talks of Sir W. Pen’s
family, how poorly they clothe their daughter so soon after marriage,
and do say that Mr. Lowther was married once before, and some such
thing there hath been, whatever the bottom of it is. But to think of the
clatter they make with his coach, and his owne fine cloathes, and yet
how meanly they live within doors, and nastily, and borrowing everything
of neighbours is a most shitten thing.