27th. Up and to the office, where I hear that Sir John Coventry is come
over from Bredah, a nephew, I think, of Sir W. Coventry’s: but what
message he brings I know not. This morning news is come that Sir Jos.
Jordan is come from Harwich, with sixteen fire-ships and four other
little ships of war: and did attempt to do some execution upon the
enemy, but did it without discretion, as most do say, so as that they
have been able to do no good, but have lost four of their fire ships.
They attempted [this], it seems, when the wind was too strong, that our
grapplings could not hold: others say we come to leeward of them, but
all condemn it as a foolish management. They are come to Sir Edward
Spragg about Lee, and the Dutch are below at the Nore. At the office all
the morning; and at noon to the ‘Change, where I met Fenn; and he tells
me that Sir John Coventry do bring the confirmation of the peace; but
I do not find the ‘Change at all glad of it, but rather the worse, they
looking upon it as a peace made only to preserve the King for a time in
his lusts and ease, and to sacrifice trade and his kingdoms only to his
own pleasures: so that the hearts of merchants are quite down. He tells
me that the King and my Lady Castlemayne are quite broke off, and she is
gone away, and is with child, and swears the King shall own it; and she
will have it christened in the Chapel at White Hall so, and owned for
the King’s, as other Kings have done; or she will bring it into White
Hall gallery, and dash the brains of it out before the King’s face.

     [Charles owned only four children by Lady Castlemaine-Anne, Countess
     of Sussex, and the Dukes of Southampton, Grafton, and
     Northumberland.  The last of these was born in 1665.  The paternity
     of all her other children was certainly doubtful.  See pp. 50,52.]

He tells me that the King and Court were never in the world so bad as
they are now for gaming, swearing, whoring, and drinking, and the most
abominable vices that ever were in the world; so that all must come to
nought. He told me that Sir G. Carteret was at this end of the town; so
I went to visit him in Broad Street; and there he and I together: and he
is mightily pleased with my Lady Jem’s having a son; and a mighty glad
man he is. He [Sir George Carteret] tells me, as to news, that the
peace is now confirmed, and all that over. He says it was a very unhappy
motion in the House the other day about the land-army; for, whether the
King hath a mind of his own to do the thing desired or no, his doing it
will be looked upon as a thing done only in fear of the Parliament. He
says that the Duke of York is suspected to be the great man that is for
raising of this army, and bringing things to be commanded by an army;
but he believes that he is wronged, and says that he do know that he is
wronged therein. He do say that the Court is in a way to ruin all for
their pleasures; and says that he himself hath once taken the liberty to
tell the King the necessity of having, at least, a show of religion in
the Government, and sobriety; and that it was that, that did set up and
keep up Oliver, though he was the greatest rogue in the world, and that
it is so fixed in the nature of the common Englishman that it will not
out of him. He tells me that while all should be labouring to settle the
kingdom, they are at Court all in factions, some for and others against
my Lord Chancellor, and another for and against another man, and the
King adheres to no man, but this day delivers himself up to this, and
the next to that, to the ruin of himself and business; that he is at
the command of any woman like a slave, though he be the best man to the
Queene in the world, with so much respect, and never lies a night from
her: but yet cannot command himself in the presence of a woman he likes.
Having had this discourse, I parted, and home to dinner, and thence to
the office all the afternoon to my great content very busy. It raining
this day all day to our great joy, it having not rained, I think, this
month before, so as the ground was everywhere so burned and dry as could
be; and no travelling in the road or streets in London, for dust. At
night late home to supper and to bed.