8th. Up, and to the Old Swan, where drank at Michell’s, but not seeing
her whom I love I by water to White Hall, and there acquainted Sir G.
Carteret betimes what I had to say this day before the Duke of York in
the business of Carcasse, which he likes well of, being a great enemy to
him, and then I being too early here to go to Sir W. Coventry’s chamber,
having nothing to say to him, and being able to give him but a bad
account of the business of the office (which is a shame to me, and that
which I shall rue if I do not recover), to the Exchequer about getting a
certificate of Mr. Lanyon’s entered at Sir R. Longs office, and strange
it is to see what horrid delays there are at this day in the business
of money, there being nothing yet come from my Lord Treasurer to set
the business of money in action since the Parliament broke off,
notwithstanding the greatness and number of the King’s occasions for
it. So to the Swan, and there had three or four baisers of the little
ancilla there, and so to Westminster Hall, where I saw Mr. Martin, the
purser, come through with a picture in his hand, which he had bought,
and observed how all the people of the Hall did fleer and laugh upon
him, crying, “There is plenty grown upon a sudden;” and, the truth is, I
was a little troubled that my favour should fall on so vain a fellow as
he, and the more because, methought, the people do gaze upon me as the
man that had raised him, and as if they guessed whence my kindness to
him springs. So thence to White Hall, where I find all met at the Duke
of York’s chamber; and, by and by, the Duke of York comes, and Carcasse
is called in, and I read the depositions and his answers, and he added
with great confidence and good words, even almost to persuasion, what to
say; and my Lord Bruncker, like a very silly solicitor, argued against
me and us all for him; and, being asked first by the Duke of York
his opinion, did give it for his being excused. I next did answer the
contrary very plainly, and had, in this dispute, which vexed and will
never be forgot by my Lord, many occasions of speaking severely, and
did, against his bad practices. Commissioner Pett, like a fawning rogue,
sided with my Lord, but to no purpose; and [Sir] W. Pen, like a cunning
rogue, spoke mighty indifferently, and said nothing in all the fray,
like a knave as he is. But [Sir] W. Batten spoke out, and did come off
himself by the Duke’s kindness very well; and then Sir G. Carteret, and
Sir W. Coventry, and the Duke of York himself, flatly as I said; and
so he was declared unfit to continue in, and therefore to be presently
discharged the office; which, among other good effects, I hope, will
make my Lord Bruncker not ‘alloquer’ so high, when he shall consider he
hath had such a publick foyle as this is. So home with [Sir] W. Batten,
and [Sir] W. Pen, by coach, and there met at the office, and my Lord
Bruncker presently after us, and there did give order to Mr. Stevens for
securing the tickets in Carcasses hands, which my Lord against his will
could not refuse to sign, and then home to dinner, and so away with my
wife by coach, she to Mrs. Pierce’s and I to my Lord Bellasses, and
with him to [my] Lord Treasurer’s, where by agreement we met with Sir
H. Cholmly, and there sat and talked all the afternoon almost about one
thing or other, expecting Sir Philip Warwicke’s coming, but he come not,
so we away towards night, Sir H. Cholmly and I to the Temple, and there
parted, telling me of my Lord Bellasses’s want of generosity, and that
he [Bellasses] will certainly be turned out of his government, and
he thinks himself stands fair for it. So home, and there found, as I
expected, Mrs. Pierce and Mr. Batelier; he went for Mrs. Jones, but
no Mrs. Knipp come, which vexed me, nor any other company. So with one
fidler we danced away the evening, but I was not well contented with the
littleness of the room, and my wife’s want of preparing things ready, as
they should be, for supper, and bad. So not very merry, though very well
pleased. So after supper to bed, my wife and Mrs. Pierce, and her boy
James and I. Yesterday I began to make this mark (V) stand instead of
three pricks, which therefore I must observe every where, it being a
mark more easy to make.