15th. [This morning my wife had some things brought home by a new woman
of the New Exchange, one Mrs. Smith, which she would have me see for her
fine hand, and indeed it is a fine hand, and the woman I have observed
is a mighty pretty looked woman.] Up, and with Sir W. Batten and [Sir]
J. Minnes to St. James’s, and stopt at Temple Bar for Sir J. Minnes to
go into the Devil’s Taverne to shit, he having drunk whey, and his belly
wrought. Being come, we up to the Duke of York’s chamber, who, when
ready, we to our usual business, and being very glad, we all that signed
it, that is, Sir J. Minnes, W. Batten, W. Pen, and myself, and then
Sir G. Carteret and [Sir] W. Coventry, Bruncker, and T. Harvy, and the
officers of the Ordnance, Sir J. Duncombe, and Mr. Cholmely presented
our report about Carcasse, and did afterwards read it with that success
that the Duke of York was for punishing him, not only with turning him
out of the office, but with what other punishment he could, which nobody
did forward, and so he escaped, only with giving security to secure the
King against double tickets of his and other things that he might have
wronged the King or subject in before his dismission. Yet, Lord! to
see how our silly Lord Bruncker would have stood to have justified this
rogue, though to the reproach of all us who have signed, which I shall
never forget to have been a most malicious or a most silly act, and I do
think it is as much the latter as the other, for none but a fool could
have done as this silly Lord hath done in this business. So the Duke of
York did like our report, and ordered his being secured till he did give
his security, which did fully content me, and will I hope vindicate the
office. It happened that my Lord Arlington coming in by chance was at
the hearing of all this, which I was not sorry for, for he did move or
did second the Duke of York that this roguery of his might be put in the
News-book that it might be made publique to satisfy for the wrong the
credit of this office hath received by this rogue’s occasion. So with
utmost content I away with Sir G. Carteret to London, talking all the
way; and he do tell me that the business of my Lord Hinchingbroke his
marriage with my Lord Burlington’s daughter is concluded on by all
friends; and that my Lady is now told of it, and do mightily please
herself with it; which I am mighty glad of. So home, and there I find
that my wife hath been at my desire at the Inne, thinking that my father
might be come up with the coach, but he is not come this week, poor
man, but will be here the next. At noon to dinner, and then to Sir
W. Batten’s, where I hear the news how our Embassadors were but ill
received at Flushing, nor at Bredah itself, there being only a house and
no furniture provided for them, though it be said that they have as much
as the French. Here we staid talking a little, and then I to the office
about my business, and thence to the office, where busy about my own
papers of my office, and by and by comes the office full to examine Sir
W. Warren’s account, which I do appear mighty fierce in against him, and
indeed am, for his accounts are so perplexed that I am sure he cannot
but expect to get many a L1000 in it before it passes our hands, but I
will not favour him, but save what I can to the King. At his accounts,
wherein I very high against him, till late, and then we broke up with
little done, and so broke up, and I to my office, where late doing of
business, and then home to supper and to bed. News still that my Lord
Treasurer is so ill as not to be any man of this world; and it is said
that the Treasury shall be managed by Commission. I would to God Sir G.
Carteret, or my Lord Sandwich, be in it! But the latter is the more fit
for it. This day going to White Hall, Sir W. Batten did tell me strange
stories of Sir W. Pen, how he is already ashamed of the fine coach which
his son-in-law and daughter have made, and indeed it is one of the most
ridiculous things for people of their low, mean fashion to make such
a coach that ever I saw. He tells me how his people come as they do to
mine every day to borrow one thing or other, and that his Lady hath been
forced to sell some coals (in the late dear time) only to enable her
to pay money that she hath borrowed of Griffin to defray her family
expense, which is a strange story for a rogue that spends so much money
on clothes and other occasions himself as he do, but that which is most
strange, he tells me that Sir W. Pen do not give L6000, as is usually
[supposed], with his daughter to him, and that Mr. Lowder is come to use
the tubb, that is to bathe and sweat himself, and that his lady is come
to use the tubb too, which he takes to be that he hath, and hath given
her the pox, but I hope it is not so, but, says Sir W. Batten, this is
a fair joynture, that he hath made her, meaning by that the costs the
having of a bath.