285.]

and several other of our ships by us sunk, and several of the enemy’s,
whereof three men-of-war that they could not get off, and so burned. We
did also see several dead bodies lie by the side of the water. I do not
see that Upnor Castle hath received any hurt by them, though they played
long against it; and they themselves shot till they had hardly a gun
left upon the carriages, so badly provided they were: they have now
made two batteries on that side, which will be very good, and do good
service. So to the chaine, and there saw it fast at the end on Upnor
side of the River; very fast, and borne up upon the several stages
across the River; and where it is broke nobody can tell me. I went on
shore on Upnor side to look upon the end of the chaine; and caused
the link to be measured, and it was six inches and one-fourth in
circumference. They have burned the Crane House that was to hawl it
taught. It seems very remarkable to me, and of great honour to the
Dutch, that those of them that did go on shore to Gillingham, though
they went in fear of their lives, and were some of them killed; and,
notwithstanding their provocation at Schelling, yet killed none of our
people nor plundered their houses, but did take some things of easy
carriage, and left the rest, and not a house burned; and, which is to
our eternal disgrace, that what my Lord Douglas’s men, who come after
them, found there, they plundered and took all away; and the watermen
that carried us did further tell us, that our own soldiers are far more
terrible to those people of the country-towns than the Dutch themselves.
We were told at the batteries, upon my seeing of the field-guns that
were there, that, had they come a day sooner, they had been able to have
saved all; but they had no orders, and lay lingering upon the way, and
did not come forward for want of direction. Commissioner Pett’s house
was all unfurnished, he having carried away all his goods. I met with no
satisfaction whereabouts the chaine was broke, but do confess I met with
nobody that I could well expect to have satisfaction [from], it being
Sunday; and the officers of the Yard most of them abroad, or at the Hill
house, at the pay of the Chest, which they did make use of to day to do
part in. Several complaints, I hear, of the Monmouth’s coming away too
soon from the chaine, where she was placed with the two guard-ships to
secure it; and Captain Robert Clerke, my friend, is blamed for so
doing there, but I hear nothing of him at London about it; but Captain
Brookes’s running aground with the “Sancta Maria,” which was one of the
three ships that were ordered to be sunk to have dammed up the River
at the chaine, is mightily cried against, and with reason, he being the
chief man to approve of the abilities of other men, and the other two
slips did get safe thither and he run aground; but yet I do hear that
though he be blameable, yet if she had been there, she nor two more to
them three would have been able to have commanded the river all over. I
find that here, as it hath been in our river, fire-ships, when fitted,
have been sunk afterwards, and particularly those here at the Mussle,
where they did no good at all. Our great ships that were run aground
and sunk are all well raised but the “Vanguard,” which they go about to
raise to-morrow. “The Henery,” being let loose to drive up the river of
herself, did run up as high as the bridge, and broke down some of the
rails of the bridge, and so back again with the tide, and up again, and
then berthed himself so well as no pilot could ever have done better;
and Punnet says he would not, for his life, have undertaken to have done
it, with all his skill. I find it is true that the Dutch did heele “The
Charles” to get her down, and yet run aground twice or thrice, and yet
got her safe away, and have her, with a great many good guns in
her, which none of our pilots would ever have undertaken. It is very
considerable the quantity of goods, which the making of these platforms
and batterys do take out of the King’s stores: so that we shall have
little left there, and, God knows! no credit to buy any; besides, the
taking away and spending of (it is possible) several goods that would
have been either rejected or abatement made for them before used. It
is a strange thing to see that, while my Lords Douglas and Middleton do
ride up and down upon single horses, my Lord Bruncker do go up and down
with his hackney-coach and six horses at the King’s charge, which will
do, for all this time, and the time that he is likely to stay, must
amount to a great deal. But I do not see that he hath any command over
the seamen, he being affronted by three or four seamen before my very
face, which he took sillily, methought; and is not able to do so much
good as a good boatswain in this business. My Lord Bruncker, I perceive,
do endeavour to speak well of Commissioner Pett, saying that he did
exercise great care and pains while he was there, but do not undertake
to answer for his not carrying up of the great ships. Back again to
Rochester, and there walked to the Cathedral as they were beginning of
the service, but would not be seen to stay to church there, besides had
no mind, but rather to go to our inne, the White Hart, where we drank
and were fain (the towne being so full of soldiers) to have a bed corded
for us to lie in, I being unwilling to lie at the Hill house for one
night, being desirous to be near our coach to be gone betimes to-morrow
morning. Here in the streets, I did hear the Scotch march beat by the
drums before the soldiers, which is very odde. Thence to the Castle, and
viewed it with Creed, and had good satisfaction from him that showed it
us touching the history of it. Then into the fields, a fine walk, and
there saw Sir Francis Clerke’s house, which is a pretty seat, and then
back to our inne and bespoke supper, and so back to the fields and into
the Cherry garden, where we had them fresh gathered, and here met with a
young, plain, silly shopkeeper, and his wife, a pretty young woman, the
man’s name Hawkins, and I did kiss her, and we talked (and the woman of
the house is a very talking bawdy jade), and eat cherries together, and
then to walk in the fields till it was late, and did kiss her, and I
believe had I had a fit time and place I might have done what I would
with her. Walked back and left them at their house near our inne, and
then to our inne, where, I hear, my Lord Bruncker hath sent for me to
speak with me before I go: so I took his coach, which stands there with
two horses, and to him and to his bedside, where he was in bed, and
hath a watchman with a halbert at his door; and to him, and did talk a
little, and find him a very weak man for this business that he is upon;
and do pity the King’s service, that is no better handled, and his folly
to call away Pett before we could have found a better man to have staid
in his stead; so took leave of him, and with Creed back again, it being
now about 10 at night, and to our inne to supper, and then to bed,
being both sleepy, but could get no sheets to our bed, only linen to our
mouths, and so to sleep, merrily talking of Hawkins and his wife, and
troubled that Creed did see so much of my dalliance, though very little.