24th. Up, and with [Sir] W. Pen to St. James’s, and there the Duke of
York was preparing to go to some further ceremonies about the Garter,
that he could give us no audience. Thence to Westminster Hall, the first
day of the Term, and there joyed Mrs. Michell, who is mightily pleased
with my wife’s work yesterday, and so away to my barber’s about my
periwigg, and then to the Exchange, there to meet Fenn about some money
to be borrowed of the office of the Ordnance to answer a great pinch. So
home to dinner, and in the afternoon met by agreement (being put on it
by Harry Bruncker’s frighting us into a despatch of Carcasse’s business)
[Lord] Bruncker, T. Harvey, [Sir] J. Minnes, [Sir] W. Batten, and I (Sir
W. Pen keeping out of the way still), where a great many high words from
Bruncker, and as many from me and others to him, and to better purpose,
for I think we have fortified ourselves to overthrow his man Carcasse,
and to do no honour to him. We rose with little done but great heat,
not to be reconciled I doubt, and I care not, for I will be on the right
side, and that shall keep me: Thence by coach to Sir John Duncomb’s’
lodging in the Pell Mell,--[See November 8th, 1664]--in order to the
money spoken of in the morning; and there awhile sat and discoursed.:
and I find him that he is a very proper man for business, being very
resolute and proud, and industrious. He told me what reformation they
had made in the office of the Ordnance, taking away Legg’s fees:

     [William Legge, eldest son of Edward Legge, sometime Vice-President
     of Munster, born 1609(?).  He served under Maurice of Nassau and
     Gustavus Adolphus, and held the rank of colonel in the Royalist
     army.  He closely attached himself to Prince Rupert, and was an
     active agent in affecting the reconciliation between that prince and
     his uncle Charles I.  Colonel Legge distinguished himself in several
     actions, and was wounded and taken prisoner at the battle of
     Worcester; it was said that he would have “been executed if his wife
     had not contrived his escape from Coventry gaol in her own clothes.”
      He was Groom of the Bedchamber to Charles I., and also to Charles
     II.; he held the offices of Master of the Armories and Lieutenant-
     General of the Ordnance.  He refused honours (a knighthood from
     Charles I. and an earldom from Charles II.), but his eldest son
     George was created Baron Dartmouth in 1682.  He died October 13th,