21st. Up and to the office, where sat all the morning. At noon dined at
home with my wife and find a new girle, a good big girle come to us, got
by Payne to be our girle; and his daughter Nell we make our cook. This
wench’s name is Mary, and seems a good likely maid. After dinner I with
Mr. Commander and Mr. Hide’s brother to Lincolne’s Inne Fields, and
there viewed several coach-houses, and satisfied ourselves now fully in
it, and then there parted, leaving the rest to future discourse between
us. Thence I home; but, Lord! how it went against my heart to go away
from the very door of the Duke’s play-house, and my Lady Castlemayne’s
coach, and many great coaches there, to see “The Siege of Rhodes.” I was
very near making a forfeit, but I did command myself, and so home to my
office, and there did much business to my good content, much better
than going to a play, and then home to my wife, who is not well with
her cold, and sat and read a piece of Grand Cyrus in English by her,
and then to my chamber and to supper, and so to bed. This morning the
Captain come from Holland did tell us at the board what I have said
he reported yesterday. This evening after I come from the office Mrs.
Turner come to see my wife and me, and sit and talk with us, and so, my
wife not being well and going to bed, Mrs. Turner and I sat up till 12
at night talking alone in my chamber, and most of our discourse was of
our neighbours. As to my Lord Bruncker, she says how Mrs. Griffin,
our housekeeper’s wife, hath it from his maid, that comes to her house
often, that they are very poor; that the other day Mrs. Williams was
fain to send a jewell to pawn; that their maid hath said herself that
she hath got L50 since she come thither, and L17 by the payment of one
bill; that they have a most lewd and nasty family here in the office,
but Mrs. Turner do tell me that my Lord hath put the King to infinite
charge since his coming thither in alterations, and particularly that
Mr. Harper at Deptford did himself tell her that my Lord hath had of
Foly, the ironmonger, L50 worth in locks and keys for his house, and
that it is from the fineness of them, having some of L4 and L5 a lock,
such as is in the Duke’s closet; that he hath several of these; that he
do keep many of her things from her of her own goods, and would have her
bring a bill into the office for them; that Mrs. Griffin do say that
he do not keep Mrs. Williams now for love, but need, he having another
whore that he keeps in Covent Garden; that they do owe money everywhere
almost for every thing, even Mrs. Shipman for her butter and cheese
about L3, and after many demands cannot get it. Mrs. Turner says she do
believe their coming here is only out of a belief of getting purchase by
it, and that their servants (which was wittily said of her touching
his clerks) do act only as privateers, no purchase, no pay. And in my
conscience she is in the right. Then we fell to talk of Sir W. Pen,
and his family and rise. She [Mrs. Turner] says that he was a pityfull
[fellow] when she first knew them; that his lady was one of the sourest,
dirty women, that ever she saw; that they took two chambers, one over
another, for themselves and child, in Tower Hill; that for many years
together they eat more meals at her house than at their own; did call
brothers and sisters the husbands and wives; that her husband was
godfather to one, and she godmother to another (this Margaret) of their
children, by the same token that she was fain to write with her own hand
a letter to Captain Twiddy, to stand for a godfather for her; that
she brought my Lady, who then was a dirty slattern, with her stockings
hanging about her heels, so that afterwards the people of the whole Hill
did say that Mrs. Turner had made Mrs. Pen a gentlewoman, first to the
knowledge of my Lady Vane, Sir Henry’s lady, and him to the knowledge of
most of the great people that then he sought to, and that in short his
rise hath been his giving of large bribes, wherein, and she agrees with
my opinion and knowledge before therein, he is very profuse. This made
him General; this got him out of the Tower when he was in; and hath
brought him into what he is now, since the King’s coming in: that long
ago, indeed, he would drink the King’s health privately with Mr. Turner;
but that when he saw it fit to turn Roundhead, and was offered by Mr.
Turner to drink the King’s health, he answered “No;” he was changed, and
now, he that would make him drink the King’s health, or any health but
the Protector’s and the State’s, or to that purpose, he would be the
first man should sheath his sword in his guts. That at the King’s coming
in, he did send for her husband, and told him what a great man Sir W.
Coventry was like to be, and that he having all the records in his hands
of the Navy, if he would transcribe what was of most present use of the
practice of the Navy, and give them him to give Sir W. Coventry from
him, it would undoubtedly do his business of getting him a principal
officer’s place; that her husband was at L5 charge to get these
presently writ; that Sir W. Pen did give them Sir W. Coventry as from
himself, which did set him up with W. Coventry, and made him what he is,
and never owned any thing of Mr. Turner in them; by which he left him
in the lurch, though he did promise the Duke of Albemarle to do all
that was possible, and made no question of Mr. Turner’s being what he
desired; and when afterwards, too, did propose to him the getting of
the Purveyor’s place for him, he did tell Mr. Turner it was necessary to
present Sir W. Coventry 100 pieces, which he did, and W. Coventry took