24th. Up, and to the office, where, by and by, by appointment, we met
upon Sir W. Warren’s accounts, wherein I do appear in every thing as
much as I can his enemy, though not so far but upon good conditions from
him I may return to be his friend, but I do think it necessary to do
what I do at present. We broke off at noon without doing much, and then
home, where my wife not well, but yet engaged by invitation to go with
Sir W. Pen. I got her to go with him by coach to Islington to the old
house, where his lady and Madam Lowther, with her exceeding fine coach
and mean horses, and her mother-in-law, did meet us, and two of Mr.
Lowther’s brothers, and here dined upon nothing but pigeon-pyes, which
was such a thing for him to invite all the company to, that I was
ashamed of it. But after dinner was all our sport, when there come in a
juggler, who, indeed, did shew us so good tricks as I have never seen
in my life, I think, of legerdemaine, and such as my wife hath since
seriously said that she would not believe but that he did them by the
help of the devil. Here, after a bad dinner, and but ordinary company,
saving that I discern good parts in one of the sons, who, methought, did
take me up very prettily in one or two things that I said, and I was so
sensible of it as to be a caution to me hereafter how I do venture to
speak more than is necessary in any company, though, as I did now, I
do think them incapable to censure me. We broke up, they back to
Walthamstow, and only my wife and I and Sir W. Pen to the King’s
playhouse, and there saw “The Mayden Queene,” which, though I have often
seen, yet pleases me infinitely, it being impossible, I think, ever to
have the Queen’s part, which is very good and passionate, and Florimel’s
part, which is the most comicall that ever was made for woman, ever
done better than they two are by young Marshall and Nelly. Home, where
I spent the evening with my father and wife, and late at night some
flagillette with my wife, and then to supper and to bed.