6th. Up and angry with my mayds for letting in watermen, and I know not
who, anybody that they are acquainted with, into my kitchen to talk and
prate with them, which I will not endure. Then out and by coach to
my Lord Treasurer’s, who continues still very ill, then to Sir Ph.
Warwicke’s house, and there did a little business about my Tangier
tallies, and so to Westminster Hall, and there to the Exchequer to
consult about some way of getting our poor Creditors of the Navy (who
served in their goods before the late Session of Parliament) paid out
of the 11 months tax, which seems to relate only for goods to be then
served in, and I think I have found out a way to bring them into the
Act, which, if it do, I shall think a good service done. Thence by coach
home with Captain Cocke, in our way talking of my Lord Bruncker and his
Lady, who are mighty angry with us all of the office, about Carcasse’s
business, but especially with me, and in great confidence he bids me
have a care of him, for he hath said that he would wound me with
the person where my greatest interest is. I suppose he means Sir W.
Coventry, and therefore I will beware of him, and am glad, though vexed
to hear it. So home to dinner, where Creed come, whom I vexed devilishly
with telling him a wise man, and good friend of his and mine, did say
that he lately went into the country to Hinchingbroke; and, at his
coming to town again, hath shifted his lodgings, only to avoid paying to
the Poll Bill, which is so true that he blushed, and could not in words
deny it, but the fellow did think to have not had it discovered. He is
so devilish a subtle false rogue, that I am really weary and afeard of
his company, and therefore after dinner left him in the house, and to my
office, where busy all the afternoon despatching much business, and in
the evening to Sir R. Viner’s to adjust accounts there, and so home,
where some of our old Navy creditors come to me by my direction to
consider of what I have invented for their help as I have said in the
morning, and like it mighty well, and so I to the office, where busy
late, then home to supper and sing with my wife, who do begin to give me
real pleasure with her singing, and so to bed.