26th. Up, and Greeting come, and I reckoned with him for his teaching
of my wife and me upon the flageolet to this day, and so paid him for
having as much as he can teach us. Then to the Office, where we sat upon
a particular business all the morning: and my Lord Anglesey with us:
who, and my Lord Bruncker, do bring us news how my Lord Chancellor’s
seal is to be taken away from him to-day. The thing is so great and
sudden to me, that it put me into a very great admiration what should be
the meaning of it; and they do not own that they know what it should be:
but this is certain, that the King did resolve it on Saturday, and did
yesterday send the Duke of Albemarle, the only man fit for those works,
to him for his purse: to which the Chancellor answered, that he received
it from the King, and would deliver it to the King’s own hand, and so
civilly returned the Duke of Albemarle without it; and this morning
my Lord Chancellor is to be with the King, to come to an end in the
business. After sitting, we rose, and my wife being gone abroad
with Mrs. Turner to her washing at the whitster’s, I dined at Sir W.
Batten’s, where Mr. Boreman was, who come from White Hall; who tells us
that he saw my Lord Chancellor come in his coach with some of his men,
without his Seal, to White Hall to his chamber; and thither the King and
Duke of York come and staid together alone, an hour or more: and it is
said that the King do say that he will have the Parliament meet, and
that it will prevent much trouble by having of him out of their enmity,
by his place being taken away; for that all their enmity will be at him.
It is said also that my Lord Chancellor answers, that he desires he may
be brought to his trial, if he have done any thing to lose his office;
and that he will be willing, and is most desirous, to lose that, and
his head both together. Upon what terms they parted nobody knows but the
Chancellor looked sad, he says. Then in comes Sir Richard Ford, and says
he hears that there is nobody more presses to reconcile the King and
Chancellor than the Duke of Albemarle and Duke of Buckingham: the latter
of which is very strange, not only that he who was so lately his enemy
should do it, but that this man, that but the other day was in danger of
losing his own head, should so soon come to be a mediator for others: it
shows a wise Government. They all say that he [Clarendon] is but a poor
man, not worth above L3000 a-year in land; but this I cannot believe:
and all do blame him for having built so great a house, till he had got
a better estate. Having dined, Sir J. Minnes and I to White Hall, where
we could be informed in no more than we were told before, nobody knowing
the result of the meeting, but that the matter is suspended. So I
walked to the King’s playhouse, there to meet Sir W. Pen, and saw “The
Surprizall,” a very mean play, I thought: or else it was because I was
out of humour, and but very little company in the house. But there Sir
W. Pen and I had a great deal of discourse with Moll; who tells us that
Nell is already left by my Lord Buckhurst, and that he makes sport of
her, and swears she hath had all she could get of him; and Hart,

     [Charles Hart, great-nephew of Shakespeare, a favourite actor.  He
     is credited with being Nell Gwyn’s first lover (or Charles I., as
     the wits put it), and with having brought her on the stage.  He died
     of stone, and was buried at Stanmore Magna, Middlesex, where he had
     a country house.]

her great admirer, now hates her; and that she is very poor, and hath
lost my Lady Castlemayne, who was her great friend also but she is come
to the House, but is neglected by them all.

     [Lord Buckhurst’s liaison with Nell Gwyn probably came to an end
     about this time.  We learn from Pepys that in January, 1667-68, the
     king sent several times for Nelly (see January 11th, 1667-68).
     Nell’s eldest son by Charles II., Charles Beauclerc, was not born
     till May 8th, 1670.  He was created Earl of Burford in 1676 and Duke
     of St. Albans in 1684.]

Thence with Sir W. Pen home, and I to the office, where late about
business, and then home to supper, and so to bed.