18th. Up, and by coach with Sir W. Pen to White Hall, and there attended
the Duke of York; but first we find him to spend above an hour in
private in his closet with Sir W. Coventry; which I was glad to see,
that there is so much confidence between them. By and by we were called
in and did our usual business, and complained of the business yesterday
discovered of our officers abusing the King in the appraisement of the
prizes. Here it was worth observing that the Duke of York, considering
what third rate ships to keep abroad, the Rupert was thought on, but
then it was said that Captain Hubbert was Commander of her and that the
King had a mind for Spragg to command the ship, which would not be well
to be by turning out Hubbert, who is a good man, but one the Duke of
York said he did not know whether he did so well conforme, as at this
lime to please the people and Parliament. Sir W. Coventry answered, and
the Duke of York merrily agreed to it, that it was very hard to know
what it was that the Parliament would call conformity at this time, and
so it stopped, which I only observe to see how the Parliament’s present
temper do amuse them all. Thence to several places to buy a hat, and
books, and neckcloths, and several errands I did before I got home, and,
among others, bought me two new pair of spectacles of Turlington, who,
it seems, is famous for them; and his daughter, he being out of the way,
do advise me two very young sights, as that that will help me most, and
promises me great ease from them, and I will try them. At the Exchange I
met Creed, and took him home with me, and dined, and among other things
he tells me that Sir Robert Brookes is the man that did mention the
business in Parliament yesterday about my Lord Sandwich, but that it was
seconded by nobody, but the matter will fall before the Committee for
miscarriages. Thence, after dinner, my wife and he, and I, and Willet to
the King’s house, and saw “Brenoralt,” which is a good tragedy, that I
like well, and parted after the play, and so home, and there a little
at my office, and so to my chamber, and spent this night late in telling
over all my gold, and putting it into proper bags and my iron chest,
being glad with my heart to see so much of it here again, but cannot
yet tell certainly how much I have lost by Gibson in his journey, and my
father’s burying of it in the dirt. At this late, but did it to my mind,
and so to supper and to bed.