9th (Lord’s day). Up, and by water to White Hall, and so walked to St.
James’s, where I hear that the Duke of Cambridge, who was given over
long since by the Doctors, is now likely to recover; for which God be
praised! To Sir W. Coventry, and there talked with him a great while;
and mighty glad I was of my good fortune to visit him, for it keeps in
my acquaintance with him, and the world sees it, and reckons my interest
accordingly. In comes my Lord Barkeley, who is going down to Harwich
also to look after the militia there: and there is also the Duke
of Monmouth, and with him a great many young Hectors, the Lord
Chesterfield, my Lord Mandeville, and others: but to little purpose,
I fear, but to debauch the country women thereabouts. My Lord Barkeley
wanting some maps, and Sir W. Coventry recommending the six maps of
England that are bound up for the pocket, I did offer to present my Lord
with them, which he accepted: and so I will send them him. Thence to
White Hall, and there to the Chapel, where I met Creed, and he and I
staid to hear who preached, which was a man who begun dully, and so we
away by water and landed in Southwarke, and to a church in the street
where we take water beyond the bridge, which was so full and the weather
hot that we could not stand there. So to my house, where we find my
father and wife at dinner, and after dinner Creed and I by water to
White Hall, and there we parted, and I to Sir G. Carteret’s, where,
he busy, I up into the house, and there met with a gentleman, Captain
Aldrige, that belongs to my Lord Barkeley, and I did give him the book
of maps for my Lord, and so I to Westminster Church and there staid
a good while, and saw Betty Michell there. So away thence, and after
church time to Mrs. Martin’s, and then hazer what I would with her, and
then took boat and up, all alone, a most excellent evening, as high as
Barne Elmes, and there took a turn; and then to my boat again, and home,
reading and making an end of the book I lately bought a merry satyr
called “The Visions,” translated from Spanish by L’Estrange, wherein
there are many very pretty things; but the translation is, as to the
rendering it into English expression, the best that ever I saw, it being
impossible almost to conceive that it should be a translation. Being
come home I find an order come for the getting some fire-ships presently
to annoy the Dutch, who are in the King’s Channel, and expected up
higher. So [Sir] W. Batten and [Sir] W. Pen being come this evening from
their country houses to town we did issue orders about it, and then home
to supper and, to bed,