12th. Rose before day, and took coach, by daylight, and to Westminster
to Sir G. Downing’s, and there met Sir Stephen Fox, and thence he and I
to Sir Robert Longs to discourse the business of our orders for money,
he for the guards, and I for Tangier, and were a little angry in our
concerns, one against the other, but yet parted good friends, and I
think I got ground by it. Thence straight to the office, and there sat
all the morning, and then home to dinner, and after dinner I all alone
to the Duke of York’s house, and saw “The Tempest,” which, as often as I
have seen it, I do like very well, and the house very full. But I could
take little pleasure more than the play, for not being able to look
about, for fear of being seen. Here only I saw a French lady in the
pit, with a tunique, just like one of ours, only a handkercher about her
neck; but this fashion for a woman did not look decent. Thence walked to
my bookseller’s, and there he did give me a list of the twenty who were
nominated for the Commission in Parliament for the Accounts: and it is
strange that of the twenty the Parliament could not think fit to choose
their nine, but were fain to add three that were not in the list of the
twenty, they being many of them factious people and ringleaders in the
late troubles; so that Sir John Talbott did fly out and was very hot
in the business of Wildman’s being named, and took notice how he was
entertained in the bosom of the Duke of Buckingham, a Privy-counsellor;
and that it was fit to be observed by the House, and punished. The men
that I know of the nine I like very well; that is, Mr. Pierrepont, Lord
Brereton, and Sir William Turner; and I do think the rest are so, too;
but such as will not be able to do this business as it ought to be, to
do any good with. Here I did also see their votes against my Lord Chiefe
Justice Keeling, that his proceedings were illegal, and that he was a
contemner of Magna Charta (the great preserver of our lives, freedoms,
and properties) and an introduction to arbitrary government; which is
very high language, and of the same sound with that in the year 1640. I
home, and there wrote my letters, and so to supper and to bed. This day
my Lord Chancellor’s letter was burned at the ‘Change.’