17th. Up, and to my chamber to set down my Journall of Sunday last with
much pleasure, and my foot being pretty well, but yet I am forced to
limp. Then by coach, set my wife down at the New Exchange, and I to
White Hall to the Treasury chamber, but to little purpose. So to Mr.
Burges to as little. There to the Hall and talked with Mrs. Michell, who
begins to tire me about doing something for her elder son, which I am
willing to do, but know not what. Thence to White Hall again, and thence
away, and took up my wife at Unthanke’s, and left her at the ‘Change,
and so I to Bennet’s to take up a bill for the last silk I had for my
vest and coat, which I owe them for, and so to the Excise Office,
and there did a little business, and so to Temple Bar and staid at my
bookseller’s till my wife calls me, and so home, where I am saluted with
the news of Hogg’s bringing a rich Canary prize to Hull:

     [Thomas Pointer to Samuel Pepys (Hull, July 15th): “Capt. Hogg has
     brought in a great prize laden with Canary wine; also Capt. Reeves
     of the ‘Panther,’ and the ‘Fanfan,’ whose commander is slain, have
     come in with their prizes” (“Calendar of State Papers,” 1667,
     p. 298).]

and Sir W. Batten do offer me L1000 down for my particular share, beside
Sir Richard Ford’s part, which do tempt me; but yet I would not take it,
but will stand and fall with the company. He and two more, the Panther
and Fanfan, did enter into consortship; and so they have all brought
in each a prize, though ours worth as much as both theirs, and more.
However, it will be well worth having, God be thanked for it! This news
makes us all very glad. I at Sir W. Batten’s did hear the particulars of
it; and there for joy he did give the company that were there a bottle
or two of his own last year’s wine, growing at Walthamstow, than which
the whole company said they never drank better foreign wine in their
lives. Home, and to dinner, and by and by comes Mr. Pierce, who is
interested in the Panther, for some advice, and then comes Creed, and he
and I spent the whole afternoon till eight at night walking and talking
of sundry things public and private in the garden, but most of all of
the unhappy state of this nation at this time by the negligence of
the King and his Council. The Duke of Buckingham is, it seems, set at
liberty, without any further charge against him or other clearing of
him, but let to go out; which is one of the strangest instances of the
fool’s play with which all publick things are done in this age, that is
to be apprehended. And it is said that when he was charged with
making himself popular--as indeed he is, for many of the discontented
Parliament, Sir Robert Howard and Sir Thomas Meres, and others, did
attend at the Council-chamber when he was examined--he should answer,
that whoever was committed to prison by my Lord Chancellor or my Lord
Arlington, could not want being popular. But it is worth considering
the ill state a Minister of State is in, under such a Prince as ours
is; for, undoubtedly, neither of those two great men would have been
so fierce against the Duke of Buckingham at the Council-table the
other day, had they [not] been assured of the King’s good liking, and
supporting them therein: whereas, perhaps at the desire of my Lady
Castlemayne, who, I suppose, hath at last overcome the King, the Duke of
Buckingham is well received again, and now these men delivered up to the
interest he can make for his revenge. He told me over the story of Mrs.
Stewart, much after the manner which I was told it long since, and
have entered it in this book, told me by Mr. Evelyn; only he says it is
verily believed that the King did never intend to marry her to any but
himself, and that the Duke of York and Lord Chancellor were jealous
of it; and that Mrs. Stewart might be got with child by the King, or
somebody else, and the King own a marriage before his contract, for it
is but a contract, as he tells me, to this day, with the Queene, and so
wipe their noses of the Crown; and that, therefore, the Duke of York and
Chancellor did do all they could to forward the match with my Lord Duke
of Richmond, that she might be married out of the way; but, above all,
it is a worthy part that this good lady hath acted. Thus we talked till
night and then parted, and so I to my office and did business, and so
home to supper, and there find my sister Michell

     [The wife of Balthazar St. Michel, Mrs. Pepys’s brother.--B.  Leigh,
     opposite to Sheerness.--R.]

come from Lee to see us; but do tattle so much of the late business
of the Dutch coming thither that I was weary of it. Yet it is worth
remembering what she says: that she hath heard both seamen and soldiers
swear they would rather serve the Dutch than the King, for they should
be better used.

     [Reference has already been made to Andrew Marvell’s “Instructions
     to a Painter”, in which the unpaid English sailors are described as
     swimming to the Dutch ships, where they received the money which was
     withheld from them on their own ships.]

She saw “The Royal Charles” brought into the river by them; and how
they shot off their great guns for joy, when they got her out of Chatham
River. I would not forget that this very day when we had nothing to do
almost but five merchantmen to man in the River, which have now been
about it some weeks, I was asked at Westminster, what the matter was
that there was such ado kept in pressing of men, as it seems there is
thereabouts at this day. So after supper we all to bed, my foot very
well again, I thank God.