9th. Up, and got ready, and eat our breakfast; and then took coach:
and the poor, as they did yesterday, did stand at the coach to have
something given them, as they do to all great persons; and I did give
them something: and the town musique did also come and play: but, Lord!
what sad music they made! However, I was pleased with them, being all
of us in very good humour, and so through the town, and observed at
our College of Magdalene the posts new painted, and understand that the
Vice-Chancellor’ is there this year. And so away for Huntingdon mightily
pleased all along the road to remember old stories; and come to Brampton
at about noon, and there find my father and sister and brother all well
and here laid up our things, and up and down to see the garden with my
father, and the house, and do altogether find it very pretty; especially
the little parlour and the summerhouses in the garden, only the wall do
want greens upon it, and the house is too low-roofed; but that is only
because of my coming from a house with higher ceilings. But altogether
is very pretty; and I bless God that I am like to have such a pretty
place to retire to: and I did walk with my father without doors, and do
find a very convenient way of laying out money there in building, which
will make a very good seat, and the place deserves it, I think,
very well. By and by to dinner, and after dinner I walked up to
Hinchingbroke, where my Lady expected me; and there spent all the
afternoon with her: the same most excellent, good, discreet lady that
ever she was; and, among other things, is mightily pleased with the lady
that is like to be her son Hinchingbroke’s wife, which I am mightily
glad of. By and by my wife comes with Willet, my wife in her velvett
vest, which is mighty fine, and becomes her exceedingly. I am pleased
with my Lady Paulina and Anne, who both are grown very proper ladies,
and handsome enough. But a thousand questions my Lady asked me, till she
could think of no more almost, but walked up and down the house, with
me. But I do find, by her, that they are reduced to great straits for
money, having been forced to sell her plate, 8 or L900 worth; and she is
now going to sell a suit of her best hangings, of which I could almost
wish to buy a piece or two, if the pieces will be broke. But the house
is most excellently furnished, and brave rooms and good pictures, so
that it do please me infinitely beyond Audley End. Here we staid till
night walking and talking and drinking, and with mighty satisfaction my
Lady with me alone most of the day talking of my Lord’s bad condition
to be kept in Spayne without money and at a great expense, which (as
we will save the family) we must labour to remove. Night being come,
we took leave with all possible kindness, and so home, and there Mr.
Shepley staid with us and sapped, and full of good country discourse,
and when supper done took his leave, and we all to bed, only I a little
troubled that my father tells me that he is troubled that my wife shows
my sister no countenance, and, him but very little, but is as a stranger
in the house; and I do observe she do carry herself very high; but I
perceive there was some great falling out when she was here last, but
the reason I have no mind to enquire after, for vexing myself, being
desirous to pass my time with as much mirth as I can while I am abroad.
So all to bed. My wife and I in the high bed in our chamber, and Willet
in the trundle bed, which she desired to lie in, by us.