31st. Up, and to the office, where we met and sat all the morning. At
noon home to dinner, and by and by Mr. Osborne comes from Mr. Gawden,
and takes money and notes for L4000, and leaves me acknowledgment for
L4000 and odd; implying as if D. Gawden would give the L800 between Povy
and myself, but how he will divide it I know-not, till I speak with him,
so that my content is not yet full in the business. In the evening stept
out to Sir Robert Viner’s to get the money ready upon my notes to D.
Gawden, and there hear that Mr. Temple is very ill. I met on the ‘Change
with Captain Cocke, who tells me that he hears new certainty of the
business of Madrid, how our Embassador and the French met, and says
that two or three of my Lord’s men, and twenty one of the French men
are killed, but nothing at Court of it. He fears the next year’s service
through the badness of our counsels at White Hall, but that if they were
wise, and the King would mind his business, he might do what he would
yet. The Parliament is not yet up, being finishing some bills. So home
and to the office, and late home to supper, and to talk with my wife,
with pleasure, and to bed. I met this evening at Sir R. Viner’s our Mr.
Turner, who I find in a melancholy condition about his being removed out
of his house, but I find him so silly and so false that I dare not tell
how to trust any advice to him, and therefore did speak only generally
to him, but I doubt his condition is very miserable, and do pity his
family. Thus the month ends: myself in very good health and content of
mind in my family. All our heads full in the office at this dividing of
the Comptroller’s duty, so that I am in some doubt how it may prove to
intrench upon my benefits, but it cannot be much. The Parliament, upon
breaking up, having given the King money with much ado, and great heats,
and neither side pleased, neither King nor them. The imperfection of the
Poll Bill, which must be mended before they rise, there being several
horrible oversights to the prejudice of the King, is a certain sign of
the care anybody hath of the King’s business. Prince Rupert very ill,
and to be trepanned on Saturday next. Nobody knows who commands the
fleete next year, or, indeed, whether we shall have a fleete or no.
Great preparations in Holland and France, and the French have lately
taken Antego

     [Antigua, one of the West India Islands (Leeward Islands),
     discovered by Columbus in 1493, who is said to have named it after a
     church at Seville called Santa Maria la Antigua.  It was first
     settled by a few English families in 1632, and in 1663 another
     settlement was made under Lord Willoughby, to whom the entire island
     was granted by Charles II.  In 1666 it was invaded by a French
     force, which laid waste all the settlement.  It was reconquered by
     the English, and formally restored to them by the treaty of Breda.]

from us, which vexes us. I am in a little care through my at last
putting a great deal of money out of my hands again into the King’s upon
tallies for Tangier, but the interest which I wholly lost while in my
trunk is a temptation while things look safe, as they do in some measure
for six months, I think, and I would venture but little longer.