May 1st. Up, it being a fine day, and after doing a little business in
my chamber I left my wife to go abroad with W. Hewer and his mother in a
Hackney coach incognito to the Park, while I abroad to the Excise Office
first, and there met the Cofferer and Sir Stephen Fox about our money
matters there, wherein we agreed, and so to discourse of my Lord
Treasurer, who is a little better than he was of the stone, having
rested a little this night. I there did acquaint them of my knowledge of
that disease, which I believe will be told my Lord Treasurer. Thence to
Westminster; in the way meeting many milk-maids with their garlands upon
their pails, dancing with a fiddler before them;

     [On the 1st of May milkmaids used to borrow silver cups, tankards,
     &c., to hang them round their milkpails, with the addition of
     flowers and ribbons, which they carried upon their heads,
     accompanied by a bagpipe or fiddle, and went from door to door,
     dancing before the houses of their customers, in order to obtain a
     small gratuity from each of them.

              “In London thirty years ago,
               When pretty milkmaids went about,
               It was a goodly sight to see
               Their May-day pageant all drawn out.

              “Such scenes and sounds once blest my eyes
               And charm’d my ears; but all have vanish’d,
               On May-day now no garlands go,
               For milkmaids and their dance are banish’d.”

                    Hone’s Every-Day Book, vol. i., pp. 569, 570.]

and saw pretty Nelly standing at her lodgings’ door in Drury-lane in her
smock sleeves and bodice, looking upon one: she seemed a mighty pretty
creature. To the Hall and there walked a while, it being term. I thence
home to the Rose, and then had Doll Lane venir para me.... To my Lord
Crew’s, where I found them at dinner, and among others. Mrs. Bocket,
which I have not seen a long time, and two little dirty children, and
she as idle a prating and impertinent woman as ever she was. After
dinner my Lord took me alone and walked with me, giving me an account
of the meeting of the Commissioners for Accounts, whereof he is one. How
some of the gentlemen, Garraway, Littleton, and others, did scruple at
their first coming there, being called thither to act, as Members
of Parliament, which they could not do by any authority but that of
Parliament, and therefore desired the King’s direction in it, which was
sent for by my Lord Bridgewater, who brought answer, very short, that
the King expected they should obey his Commission. Then they went on,
and observed a power to be given them of administering and framing
an oath, which they thought they could not do by any power but Act of
Parliament; and the whole Commission did think fit to have the judges’
opinion in it; and so, drawing up their scruples in writing, they all
attended the King, who told them he would send to the judges to be
answered, and did so; who have, my Lord tells me, met three times about
it, not knowing what answer to give to it; and they have met this week,
doing nothing but expecting the solution of the judges in this point. My
Lord tells me he do believe this Commission will do more hurt than good;
it may undo some accounts, if these men shall think fit; but it can
never clear an account, for he must come into the Exchequer for all
this. Besides, it is a kind of inquisition that hath seldom ever been
granted in England; and he believes it will never, besides, give any
satisfaction to the People or Parliament, but be looked upon as a
forced, packed business of the King, especially if these Parliament-men
that are of it shall not concur with them: which he doubts they will
not, and, therefore, wishes much that the King would lay hold of this
fit occasion, and let the Commission fall. Then to talk of my Lord
Sandwich, whom my Lord Crew hath a great desire might get to be Lord
Treasurer if the present Lord should die, as it is believed he will,
in a little time; and thinks he can have no competitor but my Lord
Arlington, who, it is given out, desires it: but my Lord thinks it is
not so, for that the being Secretary do keep him a greater interest with
the King than the other would do at least, do believe, that if my Lord
would surrender him his Wardrobe place, it would be a temptation to
Arlington to assist my Lord in getting the Treasurer’s. I did object
to my Lord [Crew] that it would be no place of content, nor safety, nor
honour for my Lord, the State being so indigent as it is, and the [King]
so irregular, and those about him, that my Lord must be forced to part
with anything to answer his warrants; and that, therefore, I do believe
the King had rather have a man that may be one of his vicious caball,
than a sober man that will mind the publick, that so they may sit at
cards and dispose of the revenue of the kingdom. This my Lord was moved
at, and said he did not indeed know how to answer it, and bid me think
of it; and so said he himself would also do. He do mightily cry out of
the bad management of our monies, the King having had so much given him;
and yet, when the Parliament do find that the King should have L900,000
in his purse by the best account of issues they have yet seen, yet we
should report in the Navy a debt due from the King of L900,000; which, I
did confess, I doubted was true in the first, and knew to be true in
the last, and did believe that there was some great miscarriages in it:
which he owned to believe also, saying, that at this rate it is not in
the power of the kingdom to make a war, nor answer the King’s wants.
Thence away to the King’s playhouse, by agreement met Sir W. Pen, and
saw “Love in a Maze” but a sorry play: only Lacy’s clowne’s part, which
he did most admirably indeed; and I am glad to find the rogue at liberty
again. Here was but little, and that ordinary, company. We sat at the
upper bench next the boxes; and I find it do pretty well, and have the
advantage of seeing and hearing the great people, which may be pleasant
when there is good store. Now was only Prince Rupert and my Lord
Lauderdale, and my Lord, the naming of whom puts me in mind of my
seeing, at Sir Robert Viner’s, two or three great silver flagons, made
with inscriptions as gifts of the King to such and such persons of
quality as did stay in town the late great plague, for the keeping
things in order in the town, which is a handsome thing. But here was
neither Hart, Nell, nor Knipp; therefore, the play was not likely to
please me. Thence Sir W. Pen and I in his coach, Tiburne way, into the
Park, where a horrid dust, and number of coaches, without pleasure
or order. That which we, and almost all went for, was to see my Lady
Newcastle; which we could not, she being followed and crowded upon by
coaches all the way she went, that nobody could come near her; only I
could see she was in a large black coach, adorned with silver instead
of gold, and so white curtains, and every thing black and white, and
herself in her cap, but other parts I could not make [out]. But that
which I did see, and wonder at with reason, was to find Pegg Pen in a
new coach, with only her husband’s pretty sister with her, both patched
and very fine, and in much the finest coach in the park, and I think
that ever I did see one or other, for neatness and richness in gold,
and everything that is noble. My Lady Castlemayne, the King, my Lord
St. Albans, nor Mr. Jermyn, have so neat a coach, that ever I saw. And,
Lord! to have them have this, and nothing else that is correspondent, is
to me one of the most ridiculous sights that ever I did see, though her
present dress was well enough; but to live in the condition they do at
home, and be abroad in this coach, astonishes me. When we had spent
half an hour in the Park, we went out again, weary of the dust, and
despairing of seeing my Lady Newcastle; and so back the same way, and to
St. James’s, thinking to have met my Lady Newcastle before she got home,
but we staying by the way to drink, she got home a little before us: so
we lost our labours, and then home; where we find the two young ladies
come home, and their patches off, I suppose Sir W. Pen do not allow
of them in his sight, and going out of town to-night, though late, to
Walthamstow. So to talk a little at Sir W. Batten’s, and then home to
supper, where I find Mrs. Hewer and her son, who have been abroad with
my wife in the Park, and so after supper to read and then to bed. Sir
W. Pen did give me an account this afternoon of his design of buying Sir
Robert Brooke’s fine house at Wansted; which I so wondered at, and did
give him reasons against it, which he allowed of: and told me that he
did intend to pull down the house and build a less, and that he should
get L1500 by the old house, and I know not what fooleries. But I
will never believe he ever intended to buy it, for my part; though he
troubled Mr. Gawden to go and look upon it, and advise him in it.