17th (Lord’s day). Up betime with my wife, and by coach with Sir W. Pen
and Sir Thomas Allen to White Hall, there my wife and I the first time
that ever we went to my Lady Jemimah’s chamber at Sir Edward Carteret’s
lodgings. I confess I have been much to blame and much ashamed of our
not visiting her sooner, but better now than never. Here we took her
before she was up, which I was sorry for, so only saw her, and away to
chapel, leaving further visit till after sermon. I put my wife into the
pew below, but it was pretty to see, myself being but in a plain band,
and every way else ordinary, how the verger took me for her man,
I think, and I was fain to tell him she was a kinswoman of my Lord
Sandwich’s, he saying that none under knights-baronets’ ladies are to
go into that pew. So she being there, I to the Duke of York’s lodging,
where in his dressing-chamber he talking of his journey to-morrow or
next day to Harwich, to prepare some fortifications there; so that
we are wholly upon the defensive part this year, only we have some
expectations that we may by our squadrons annoy them in their trade by
the North of Scotland and to the Westward. Here Sir W. Pen did show the
Duke of York a letter of Hogg’s about a prize he drove in within the
Sound at Plymouth, where the Vice-Admiral claims her. Sir W. Pen would
have me speak to the latter, which I did, and I think without any
offence, but afterwards I was sorry for it, and Sir W. Pen did plainly
say that he had no mind to speak to the Duke of York about it, so that
he put me upon it, but it shall be, the last time that I will do such
another thing, though I think no manner of hurt done by it to me at
all. That done I to walk in the Parke, where to the Queene’s Chapel,
and there heard a fryer preach with his cord about his middle, in
Portuguese, something I could understand, showing that God did respect
the meek and humble, as well as the high and rich. He was full of
action, but very decent and good, I thought, and his manner of delivery
very good. Then I went back to White Hall, and there up to the closet,
and spoke with several people till sermon was ended, which was preached
by the Bishop of Hereford, an old good man, that they say made an
excellent sermon. He was by birth a Catholique, and a great gallant,
having L1500 per annum, patrimony, and is a Knight Barronet; was turned
from his persuasion by the late Archbishop Laud. He and the Bishop of
Exeter, Dr. Ward, are the two Bishops that the King do say he cannot
have bad sermons from. Here I met with Sir H. Cholmly, who tells me,
that undoubtedly my Lord Bellasses do go no more to Tangier, and that he
do believe he do stand in a likely way to go Governor; though he says,
and showed me, a young silly Lord, one Lord Allington, who hath offered
a great sum of money to go, and will put hard for it, he having a fine
lady, and a great man would be glad to have him out of the way. After
Chapel I down and took out my wife from the pew, where she was talking
with a lady whom I knew not till I was gone. It was Mrs. Ashfield of
Brampton, who had with much civility been, it seems, at our house to see
her. I am sorry I did not show her any more respect. With my wife to
Sir G. Carteret’s, where we dined and mightily made of, and most
extraordinary people they are to continue friendship with for goodness,
virtue, and nobleness and interest. After dinner he and I alone awhile
and did joy ourselves in my Lord Sandwich’s being out of the way all
this time. He concurs that we are in a way of ruin by thus being forced
to keep only small squadrons out, but do tell me that it was not choice,
but only force, that we could not keep out the whole fleete. He tells me
that the King is very kind to my Lord Sandwich, and did himself observe
to him (Sir G. Carteret), how those very people, meaning the Prince and
Duke of Albemarle, are punished in the same kind as they did seek to
abuse my Lord Sandwich. Thence away, and got a hackney coach and carried
my wife home, and there only drank, and myself back again to my Lord
Treasurer’s, where the King, Duke of York, and Sir G. Carteret and Lord
Arlington were and none else, so I staid not, but to White Hall, and
there meeting nobody I would speak with, walked into the Park and took
two or three turns all alone, and then took coach and home, where I find
Mercer, who I was glad to see, but durst [not] shew so, my wife being
displeased with her, and indeed I fear she is grown a very gossip. I
to my chamber, and there fitted my arguments which I had promised Mr.
Gawden in his behalf in some pretences to allowance of the King, and
then to supper, and so to my chamber a little again, and then to bed.
Duke of Buckingham not heard of yet.