8th. This morning my brother John come up to my bedside, and took his
leave of us, going this day to Brampton. My wife loves him mightily
as one that is pretty harmless, and I do begin to fancy him from
yesterday’s accident, it troubling me to think I should be left without
a brother or sister, which is the first time that ever I had thoughts
of that kind in my life. He gone, I up, and to the office, where we sat
upon the Victuallers’ accounts all the morning. At noon Lord Bruncker,
Sir W. Batten, [Sir] W. Pen, and myself to the Swan in Leadenhall Street
to dinner, where an exceedingly good dinner and good discourse. Sir W.
Batten come this morning from the House, where the King hath prorogued
this Parliament to October next. I am glad they are up. The Bill for
Accounts was not offered, the party being willing to let it fall;
but the King did tell them he expected it. They are parted with
great heartburnings, one party against the other. Pray God bring them
hereafter together in better temper! It is said that the King do intend
himself in this interval to take away Lord Mordaunt’s government, so as
to do something to appease the House against they come together, and let
them see he will do that of his own accord which is fit, without their
forcing him; and that he will have his Commission for Accounts go on
which will be good things. At dinner we talked much of Cromwell; all
saying he was a brave fellow, and did owe his crowne he got to himself
as much as any man that ever got one. Thence to the office, and there
begun the account which Sir W. Pen by his late employment hath examined,
but begun to examine it in the old manner, a clerk to read the Petty
warrants, my Lord Bruncker upon very good ground did except against it,
and would not suffer him to go on. This being Sir W. Pen’s clerk he took
it in snuff, and so hot they grew upon it that my Lord Bruncker left the
office. He gone (Sir) W. Pen ranted like a devil, saying that nothing
but ignorance could do this. I was pleased at heart all this while. At
last moved to have Lord Bruncker desired to return, which he did, and I
read the petty warrants all the day till late at night, that I was very
weary, and troubled to have my private business of my office stopped to
attend this, but mightily pleased at this falling out, and the truth is
[Sir] W. Pen do make so much noise in this business of his, and do it
so little and so ill, that I think the King will be little the better by
changing the hand. So up and to my office a little, but being at it all
day I could not do much there. So home and to supper, to teach Barker to
sing another piece of my song, and then to bed.