12th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, with several
things (among others) discoursed relating to our two new assistant
controllers, but especially Sir W. Pen, who is mighty troublesome in it.
At noon home to dinner, and then to the office again, and there did much
business, and by and by comes Mr. Moore, who in discourse did almost
convince me that it is necessary for my Lord Sandwich to come home end
take his command at sea this year, for that a peace is like to be. Many
considerations he did give me hereupon, which were very good both in
reference to the publick and his private condition. By and by with Lord
Bruncker by coach to his house, there to hear some Italian musique: and
here we met Tom Killigrew, Sir Robert Murray, and the Italian Signor
Baptista, who hath composed a play in Italian for the Opera, which T.
Killigrew do intend to have up; and here he did sing one of the acts. He
himself is the poet as well as the musician; which is very much, and did
sing the whole from the words without any musique prickt, and played
all along upon a harpsicon most admirably, and the composition most
excellent. The words I did not understand, and so know not how they are
fitted, but believe very well, and all in the recitativo very fine. But
I perceive there is a proper accent in every country’s discourse, and
that do reach in their setting of notes to words, which, therefore,
cannot be natural to any body else but them; so that I am not so much
smitten with it as, it may be, I should be, if I were acquainted with
their accent. But the whole composition is certainly most excellent; and
the poetry, T. Killigrew and Sir R. Murray, who understood the words,
did say was excellent. I confess I was mightily pleased with the
musique. He pretends not to voice, though it be good, but not excellent.
This done, T. Killigrew and I to talk: and he tells me how the audience
at his house is not above half so much as it used to be before the late
fire. That Knipp is like to make the best actor that ever come upon the
stage, she understanding so well: that they are going to give her L30
a-year more. That the stage is now by his pains a thousand times better
and more glorious than ever heretofore. Now, wax-candles, and many
of them; then, not above 3 lbs. of tallow: now, all things civil,
no rudeness anywhere; then, as in a bear-garden then, two or three
fiddlers; now, nine or ten of the best then, nothing but rushes upon
the ground, and every thing else mean; and now, all otherwise: then, the
Queen seldom and the King never would come; now, not the King only for
state, but all civil people do think they may come as well as any. He
tells me that he hath gone several times, eight or ten times, he tells
me, hence to Rome to hear good musique; so much he loves it, though he
never did sing or play a note. That he hath ever endeavoured in the late
King’s time, and in this, to introduce good musique, but he never could
do it, there never having been any musique here better than ballads.
Nay, says, “Hermitt poore” and “Chevy Chese”

     [“Like hermit poor in pensive place obscure” is found in “The
     Phoenix Nest,” 1593, and in Harl.  MS. No. 6910, written soon after