27th (Lord’s day). Up, and to my office, there, with W. Hewer, to
dictate a long letter to the Duke of York, about the bad state of the
office, it being a work I do think fit for the office to do, though it
be to no purpose but for their vindication in these bad times; for I
do now learn many things tending to our safety which I did not wholly
forget before, but do find the fruits of, and would I had practised them
more, as, among other things, to be sure to let our answers to orders
bear date presently after their date, that we may be found quick in our
execution. This did us great good the other day before the Parliament.
All the morning at this, at noon home to dinner, with my own family
alone. After dinner, I down to Deptford, the first time that I went to
look upon “The Maybolt,” which the King hath given me, and there she
is; and I did meet with Mr. Uthwayte, who do tell me that there are new
sails ordered to be delivered her, and a cable, which I did not speak of
at all to him. So, thereupon, I told him I would not be my own hindrance
so much as to take her into my custody before she had them, which was
all I said to him, but desired him to take a strict inventory of her,
that I might not be cheated by the master nor the company, when they
come to understand that the vessel is gone away, which he hath promised
me, and so away back again home, reading all the way the book of the
collection of oaths in the several offices of this nation, which is
worth a man’s reading, and so away home, and there my boy and I to sing,
and at it all the evening, and to supper, and so to bed. This evening
come Sir J. Minnes to me, to let me know that a Parliament-man hath
been with him, to tell him that the Parliament intend to examine him
particularly about Sir W. Coventry’s selling of places, and about my
Lord Bruncker’s discharging the ships at Chatham by ticket: for the
former of which I am more particularly sorry that that business of [Sir]
W. Coventry should come up again; though this old man tells me, and, I
believe, that he can say nothing to it.