22nd. Up, and to the office; whence Lord Bruncker, J. Minnes, W. Pen,
and I, went to examine some men that are put in there, for rescuing of
men that were pressed into the service: and we do plainly see that the
desperate condition that we put men into for want of their pay, makes
them mad, they being as good men as ever were in the world, and would
as readily serve the King again, were they but paid. Two men leapt
overboard, among others, into the Thames, out of the vessel into which
they were pressed, and were shot by the soldiers placed there to keep
them, two days since; so much people do avoid the King’s service! And
then these men are pressed without money, and so we cannot punish them
for any thing, so that we are forced only to make a show of severity by
keeping them in prison, but are unable to punish them. Returning to the
office, did ask whether we might visit Commissioner Pett, to which, I
confess, I have no great mind; and it was answered that he was close
prisoner, and we could not; but the Lieutenant of the Tower would send
for him to his lodgings, if we would: so we put it off to another time.
Returned to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon to
Captain Cocke’s to dinner; where Lord Bruncker and his Lady, Matt. Wren,
and Bulteale, and Sir Allen Apsly; the last of whom did make good sport,
he being already fallen under the retrenchments of the new Committee, as
he is Master Falconer;

     [The post of Master Falconer was afterwards granted to Charles’s son
     by Nell Gwyn, and it is still held by the Duke of St. Albans, as an
     hereditary office.--B.]

which makes him mad, and swears that we are doing that the Parliament
would have done--that is, that we are now endeavouring to destroy one
another. But it was well observed by some at the table, that they do not
think this retrenching of the King’s charge will be so acceptable to the
Parliament, they having given the King a revenue of so many L100,000’s
a-year more than his predecessors had, that he might live in pomp,
like a king. After dinner with my Lord Bruncker and his mistress to the
King’s playhouse, and there saw “The Indian Emperour;” where I find Nell
come again, which I am glad of; but was most infinitely displeased
with her being put to act the Emperour’s daughter; which is a great and
serious part, which she do most basely. The rest of the play, though
pretty good, was not well acted by most of them, methought; so that I
took no great content in it. But that, that troubled me most was, that
Knipp sent by Moll’ to desire to speak to me after the play; and she
beckoned to me at the end of the play, and I promised to come; but it
was so late, and I forced to step to Mrs. Williams’s lodgings with my
Lord Bruncker and her, where I did not stay, however, for fear of her
shewing me her closet, and thereby forcing me to give her something; and
it was so late, that for fear of my wife’s coming home before me, I was
forced to go straight home, which troubled me. Home and to the office a
little, and then home and to my chamber to read, and anon, late, comes
home my wife, with Mr. Turner and Mrs. Turner, with whom she supped,
having been with Mrs. Turner to-day at her daughter’s school, to see her
daughters dancing, and the rest, which she says is fine. They gone, I
to supper and to bed. My wife very fine to-day, in her new suit of laced
cuffs and perquisites. This evening Pelling comes to me, and tells
me that this night the Dutch letters are come, and that the peace was
proclaimed there the 19th inst., and that all is finished; which, for
my life, I know not whether to be glad or sorry for, a peace being so
necessary, and yet the peace is so bad in its terms.