22nd. Up and by coach to Sir Ph. Warwicke about business for Tangier
about money, and then to Sir Stephen Fox to give him account of a little
service I have done him about money coming to him from our office, and
then to Lovett’s and saw a few baubling things of their doing which are
very pretty, but the quality of the people, living only by shifts, do
not please me, that it makes me I do no more care for them, nor shall
have more acquaintance with them after I have got my Lady Castlemayne’s
picture home. So to White Hall, where the King at Chapel, and I would
not stay, but to Westminster to Howlett’s, and there, he being not well,
I sent for a quart of claret and burnt it and drank, and had a ‘basado’
or three or four of Sarah, whom ‘je trouve ici’, and so by coach to Sir
Robt. Viner’s about my accounts with him, and so to the ‘Change, where I
hear for certain that we are going on with our treaty of peace, and that
we are to treat at Bredah. But this our condescension people do think
will undo us, and I do much fear it. So home to dinner, where my wife
having dressed herself in a silly dress of a blue petticoat uppermost,
and a white satin waistcoat and whitehood, though I think she did it
because her gown is gone to the tailor’s, did, together with my being
hungry, which always makes me peevish, make me angry, but when my
belly was full were friends again, and dined and then by water down to
Greenwich and thence walked to Woolwich, all the way reading Playford’s
“Introduction to Musique,” wherein are some things very pretty. At
Woolwich I did much business, taking an account of the state of the
ships there under hand, thence to Blackwall, and did the like for two
ships we have repairing there, and then to Deptford and did the like
there, and so home. Captain Perriman with me from Deptford, telling me
many particulars how the King’s business is ill ordered, and indeed so
they are, God knows! So home and to the office, where did business, and
so home to my chamber, and then to supper and to bed. Landing at the
Tower to-night I met on Tower Hill with Captain Cocke and spent half
an hour walking in the dusk of the evening with him, talking of the
sorrowful condition we are in, that we must be ruined if the Parliament
do not come and chastize us, that we are resolved to make a peace
whatever it cost, that the King is disobliging the Parliament in this
interval all that may be, yet his money is gone and he must have more,
and they likely not to give it, without a great deal of do. God knows
what the issue of it will be. But the considering that the Duke of York,
instead of being at sea as Admirall, is now going from port to port,
as he is at this day at Harwich, and was the other day with the King at
Sheernesse, and hath ordered at Portsmouth how fortifications shall be
made to oppose the enemy, in case of invasion, [which] is to us a sad
consideration, and as shameful to the nation, especially after so many
proud vaunts as we have made against the Dutch, and all from the folly
of the Duke of Albemarle, who made nothing of beating them, and Sir
John Lawson he always declared that we never did fail to beat them with
lesser numbers than theirs, which did so prevail with the King as to
throw us into this war.