12th. Up, and when ready, and to my office, to do a little business,
and, coming homeward again, saw my door and hatch open, left so by Luce,
our cookmayde, which so vexed me, that I did give her a kick in our
entry, and offered a blow at her, and was seen doing so by Sir W.
Pen’s footboy, which did vex me to the heart, because I know he will
be telling their family of it; though I did put on presently a very
pleasant face to the boy, and spoke kindly to him, as one without
passion, so as it may be he might not think I was angry, but yet I was
troubled at it. So away by water to White Hall, and there did our usual
business before the Duke of York; but it fell out that, discoursing
of matters of money, it rose to a mighty heat, very high words arising
between Sir G. Carteret and [Sir] W. Coventry, the former in his passion
saying that the other should have helped things if they were so bad; and
the other answered, so he would, and things should have been better had
he been Treasurer of the Navy. I was mightily troubled at this heat, and
it will breed ill blood, I fear; but things are in that bad condition
that I do daily expect when we shall all fly in one another’s faces,
when we shall be reduced, every one, to answer for himself. We broke up;
and I soon after to Sir G. Carteret’s chamber, where I find the poor man
telling his lady privately, and she weeping. I went into them, and did
seem, as indeed I was, troubled for this; and did give the best advice
I could, which, I think, did please them: and they do apprehend me their
friend, as indeed I am, for I do take the Vice-chamberlain for a most
honest man. He did assure me that he was not, all expences and things
paid, clear in estate L15,000 better than he was when the King come in;
and that the King and Lord Chancellor did know that he was worth, with
the debt the King owed him, L50,000, I think, he said, when the King
come into England. I did pacify all I could, and then away by water
home, there to write letters and things for the dispatch of Balty away
this day to sea; and after dinner he did go, I having given him much
good counsell; and I have great hopes that he will make good use of it,
and be a good man, for I find him willing to take pains and very sober.
He being gone, I close at my office all the afternoon getting off of
hand my papers, which, by the late holidays and my laziness, were grown
too many upon my hands, to my great trouble, and therefore at it as
late as my eyes would give me leave, and then by water down to Redriffe,
meaning to meet my wife, who is gone with Mercer, Barker, and the boy
(it being most sweet weather) to walk, and I did meet with them, and
walked back, and then by the time we got home it was dark, and we
staid singing in the garden till supper was ready, and there with great
pleasure. But I tried my girles Mercer and Barker singly one after
another, a single song, “At dead low ebb,” etc., and I do clearly find
that as to manner of singing the latter do much the better, the other
thinking herself as I do myself above taking pains for a manner of
singing, contenting ourselves with the judgment and goodness of eare. So
to supper, and then parted and to bed.