4th. I up, with my head troubled to think of the issue of this morning,
so made ready and to the office, where Mr. Gawden comes, and he and I
discoursed the business well, and thinks I shall get off well enough;
but I do by Sir W. Coventry’s silence conclude that he is not satisfied
in my management of my place and the charge it puts the King to, which
I confess I am not in present condition through my late laziness to give
any good answer to. But here do D. Gawden give me a good cordiall this
morning, by telling me that he do give me five of the eight hundred
pounds on his account remaining in my hands to myself, for the service
I do him in my victualling business, and L100 for my particular share of
the profits of my Tangier imployment as Treasurer. This do begin to
make my heart glad, and I did dissemble it the better, so when Sir W.
Coventry did come, and the rest met, I did appear unconcerned, and did
give him answer pretty satisfactory what he asked me; so that I did get
off this meeting without any ground lost, but rather a great deal gained
by interposing that which did belong to my duty to do, and neither [Sir]
W. Coventry nor (Sir) W. Yen did oppose anything thereunto, which did
make my heart very glad. All the morning at this work, Sir W. Pen
making a great deal of do for the fitting him in his setting out in his
employment, and I do yield to any trouble that he gives me without any
contradiction. Sir W. Coventry being gone, we at noon to dinner to Sir
W. Pen’s, he inviting me and my wife, and there a pretty good dinner,
intended indeed for Sir W. Coventry, but he would not stay. So here I
was mighty merry and all our differences seemingly blown over, though he
knows, if he be not a fool, that I love him not, and I do the like that
he hates me. Soon as dined, my wife and I out to the Duke’s playhouse,
and there saw “Heraclius,” an excellent play, to my extraordinary
content; and the more from the house being very full, and great company;
among others, Mrs. Steward, very fine, with her locks done up with
puffes, as my wife calls them: and several other great ladies had their
hair so, though I do not like it; but my wife do mightily--but it is
only because she sees it is the fashion. Here I saw my Lord Rochester
and his lady, Mrs. Mallet, who hath after all this ado married him; and,
as I hear some say in the pit, it is a great act of charity, for he hath
no estate. But it was pleasant to see how every body rose up when my
Lord John Butler, the Duke of Ormond’s son, come into the pit towards
the end of the play, who was a servant--[lover]--to Mrs. Mallet, and now
smiled upon her, and she on him. I had sitting next to me a woman, the
likest my Lady Castlemayne that ever I saw anybody like another; but she
is a whore, I believe, for she is acquainted with every fine fellow,
and called them by their name, Jacke, and Tom, and before the end of the
play frisked to another place. Mightily pleased with the play, we home
by coach, and there a little to the office, and then to my chamber,
and there finished my Catalogue of my books with my own hand, and so to
supper and to bed, and had a good night’s rest, the last night’s being
troublesome, but now my heart light and full of resolution of standing
close to my business.