26th. Up, all the morning at the office, and then home to dinner, where
dined Mr. Clerke, solicitor, with me, to discourse about my Tangier
accounts, which I would fain make up, but I have not time. After dinner,
by coach as far as the Temple, and there saw a new book, in folio, of
all that suffered for the King in the late times, which I will buy,
it seems well writ, and then back to the Old Exchange, and there at my
goldsmith’s bought a basin for my wife to give the Parson’s child, to
which the other day she was godmother. It cost me; L10 14s. besides
graving, which I do with the cypher of the name, Daniel Mills, and so
home to the office, and then home to supper and hear my wife read, and
then to bed. This afternoon, after dinner, come to me Mr. Warren, and
there did tell me that he come to pay his debt to me for the kindness I
did him in getting his last ship out, which I must also remember was
a service to the King, though I did not tell him so, as appeared by my
advising with the board, and there writing to Sir W. Coventry to get the
pass for the ship to go for it to Genoa. Now that which he had promised
me for the courtesy was I take it 100 pieces or more, I think more, and
also for the former courtesy I had done for the getting of his first
ship out for this hemp he did promise me a consideration upon the return
of the goods, but I never did to this day demand any thing of him, only
about a month ago he told me that now his ship was come, and he would
come out of my debt, but told me that whereas he did expect to have had
some profit by the voyage, it had proved of loss to him, by the loss of
some ships, or some accidents, I know not what, and so that he was not
able to do what he intended, but told me that he would present me with
sixty pieces in gold. I told him I would demand nothing of his promises,
though they were much greater, nor would have thus much, but if he could
afford to give me but fifty pieces, it should suffice me. So now he
brought something in a paper, which since proves to be fifty pieces. But
before I would take them I told him that I did not insist on anything,
and therefore prayed him to consult his ability before he did part with
them: and so I refused them once or twice till he did the third time
offer them, and then I took them, he saying that he would present me
with as many more if I would undertake to get him L500 paid on his
bills. I told him I would by no means have any promise of the kind, nor
would have any kindness from him for any such service, but that I should
do my utmost for nothing to do him that justice, and would endeavour to
do what I could for him, and so we parted, he owning himself mightily
engaged to me for my kind usage of him in accepting of so small a matter
in satisfaction of all that he owed me; which I enter at large for my
justification if anything of this should be hereafter enquired after.
This evening also comes to me to my closet at the Office Sir John
Chichly, of his own accord, to tell me what he shall answer to the
Committee, when, as he expects, he shall be examined about my Lord
Sandwich; which is so little as will not hurt my Lord at all, I know. He
do profess great generousness towards my Lord, and that this jealousy of
my Lord’s of him is without ground, but do mightily inveigh against Sir
Roger Cuttance, and would never have my Lord to carry him to sea again,
as being a man that hath done my Lord more hurt than ever he can repair
by his ill advice, and disobliging every body. He will by no means seem
to crouch to my Lord, but says that he hath as good blood in his veins
as any man, though not so good a title, but that he will do nothing to
wrong or prejudice my Lord, and I hope he will not, nor I believe can;
but he tells me that Sir E. Spragg and Utber are the men that have done
my Lord the most wrong, and did bespatter him the most at Oxford, and
that my Lord was misled to believe that all that was there said was his,
which indeed it was not, and says that he did at that time complain
to his father of this his misfortune. This I confess is strange to me
touching these two men, but yet it may well enough as the world goes,
though I wonder I confess at the latter of the two, who always professes
great love to my Lord. Sir Roger Cuttance was with me in the morning,
and there gives me an account so clear about Bergen and the other
business against my Lord, as I do not see what can be laid to my Lord in
either, and tells me that Pen, however he now dissembles it, did on the
quarter deck of my Lord’s ship, after he come on board, when my Lord
did fire a gun for the ships to leave pursuing the enemy, Pen did say,
before a great many, several times, that his heart did leap in his belly
for joy when he heard the gun, and that it was the best thing that could
be done for securing the fleet. He tells me also that Pen was the first
that did move and persuade my Lord to the breaking bulke, as a thing
that was now the time to do right to the commanders of the great ships,
who had no opportunity of getting anything by prizes, now his Lordship
might distribute to everyone something, and he himself did write down
before my Lord the proportions for each man. This I am glad of, though
it may be this dissembling fellow may, twenty to one, deny it.