11th. Up, and by water to the Temple, and thence to Sir Ph. Warwicke’s
about my Tangier warrant for tallies, and there met my Lord Bellasses
and Creed, and discoursed about our business of money, but we are
defeated as to any hopes of getting [any] thing upon the Poll Bill,
which I seem but not much troubled at, it not concerning me much. Thence
with Creed to Westminster Hall, and there up and down, and heard that
Prince Rupert is still better and better; and that he did tell Dr.
Troutbecke expressly that my Lord Sandwich is ordered home. I hear, too,
that Prince Rupert hath begged the having of all the stolen prize-goods
which he can find, and that he is looking out anew after them, which at
first troubled me; but I do see it cannot come to anything, but is done
by Hayes, or some of his little people about him. Here, among other
newes, I bought the King’s speech at proroguing the House the other day,
wherein are some words which cannot but import some prospect of a peace,
which God send us! After walking a good while in the Hall, it being
Term time, I home by water, calling at Michell’s and giving him a fair
occasion to send his wife to the New Exchange to meet my wife and me
this afternoon. So home to dinner, and after dinner by coach to Lord
Bellasses, and with him to Povy’s house, whom we find with Auditor Beale
and Vernatty about their accounts still, which is never likely to have
end. Our business was to speak with Vernatty, who is certainly a most
cunning knave as ever was born. Having done what we had to do there, my
Lord carried me and set me down at the New Exchange, where I staid at
Pottle’s shop till Betty Michell come, which she did about five o’clock,
and was surprised not to ‘trouver my muger’ I there; but I did make an
excuse good enough, and so I took ‘elle’ down, and over the water to the
cabinet-maker’s, and there bought a dressing-box for her for 20s., but
would require an hour’s time to make fit. This I was glad of, thinking
to have got ‘elle’ to enter to a ‘casa de biber’, but ‘elle’ would not,
so I did not much press it, but suffered ‘elle’ to enter ‘a la casa de
uno de sus hermanos’, and so I past my time walking up and down, and
among other places, to one Drumbleby, a maker of flageolets, the best in
towne. He not within, my design to bespeak a pair of flageolets of the
same tune, ordered him to come to me in a day or two, and so I back to
the cabinet-maker’s and there staid; and by and by Betty comes, and
here we staid in the shop and above seeing the workmen work, which was
pretty, and some exceeding good work, and very pleasant to see them do
it, till it was late quite dark, and the mistresse of the shop took us
into the kitchen and there talked and used us very prettily, and took
her for my wife, which I owned and her big belly, and there very merry,
till my thing done, and then took coach and home ... But now comes our
trouble, I did begin to fear that ‘su marido’ might go to my house
to ‘enquire pour elle’, and there, ‘trouvant’ my ‘muger’--[wife in
Spanish.]--at home, would not only think himself, but give my ‘femme’
occasion to think strange things. This did trouble me mightily, so
though ‘elle’ would not seem to have me trouble myself about it, yet did
agree to the stopping the coach at the streete’s end, and ‘je allois con
elle’ home, and there presently hear by him that he had newly sent ‘su
mayde’ to my house to see for her mistresse. This do much perplex me,
and I did go presently home Betty whispering me behind the ‘tergo de her
mari’, that if I would say that we did come home by water, ‘elle’ could
make up ‘la cose well satis’, and there in a sweat did walk in the entry
ante my door, thinking what I should say a my ‘femme’, and as God would
have it, while I was in this case (the worst in reference a my ‘femme’
that ever I was in in my life), a little woman comes stumbling to the
entry steps in the dark; whom asking who she was, she enquired for my
house. So knowing her voice, and telling her ‘su donna’ is come home
she went away. But, Lord! in what a trouble was I, when she was gone,
to recollect whether this was not the second time of her coming, but at
last concluding that she had not been here before, I did bless myself
in my good fortune in getting home before her, and do verily believe she
had loitered some time by the way, which was my great good fortune, and
so I in a-doors and there find all well. So my heart full of joy, I to
the office awhile, and then home, and after supper and doing a little
business in my chamber I to bed, after teaching Barker a little of my
song.