2nd. Up, and put on my new silke camelott suit, made of my cloak, and
suit now made into a vest. So to the office, where W. Pen and myself,
and Sir T. Harvy met, the first time we have had a meeting since the
coming of the Dutch upon this coast. Our only business (for we have
little else to do, nobody being willing to trust us for anything) was
to speak with the owners of six merchantmen which we have been taking
up this fortnight, and are yet in no readiness, they not fitting their
ships without money advanced to them, we owing them for what their ships
have earned the last year. So every thing stands still for money, while
we want money to pay for some of the most necessary things that we
promised ready money for in the height of our wants, as grapnells, &c.
At noon home to dinner, and after dinner my wife and Jane (mighty fine
the girle) to go to see Jane’s old mistress, who was to see her, and did
see my wife the other day, and it is pleasant to hear with what kindness
her old mistress speaks of this girle, and how she would still have her,
and how the wench cried when she told her that she must come to her old
mistress my wife. They gone, I to my chamber, and there dallied a little
with my maid Nell.... and so to the office where busy till night, and
then comes Mrs. Turner, and walks with me in the garden to talk with me
about her husband’s business, and to tell me how she hears at the other
end of the town how bad our office is spoken of by the King and Prince
and Duke of Albemarle, and that there is not a good word said of any of
us but of me; and me they all do speak mightily of, which, whether true
or no, I am mighty glad to hear, but from all put together that I hear
from other people, I am likely to pass as well as anybody. So, she gone,
comes my wife and to walk in the garden, Sir J. Minnes being still ill
and so keeping us from singing, and by and by Sir W. Pen come and walked
with us and gave us a bottle of Syder, and so we home to supper and to
bed. This day I am told that poor Tooker is dead, a very painfull poor
man as ever I knew.