21st. Up, and betimes got a coach at the Exchange, and thence to St.
James’s, where I had forgot that the Duke of York and family were gone
to White Hall, and thence to Westminster Hall and there walked a little,
finding the Parliament likely to be busy all this morning about the
business of Mr. Bruncker for advising Cox and Harman to shorten sail
when they were in pursuit of the Dutch after the first great victory.
I went away to Mr. Creed’s chamber, there to meet Sir H. Cholmly, about
business of Mr. Yeabsly, where I was delivered of a great fear that they
would question some of the orders for payment of money which I had got
them signed at the time of the plague, when I was here alone, but all
did pass. Thence to Westminster again, and up to the lobby, where many
commanders of the fleete were, and Captain Cox, and Mr. Pierce, the
Surgeon; the last of whom hath been in the House, and declared that he
heard Bruncker advise; and give arguments to, Cox, for the safety of the
Duke of York’s person, to shorten sail, that they might not be in the
middle of the enemy in the morning alone; and Cox denying to observe his
advice, having received the Duke of York’s commands over night to keep
within cannon-shot (as they then were) of the enemy, Bruncker did go to
Harman, and used the same arguments, and told him that he was sure it
would be well pleasing to the King that care should be taken of not
endangering the Duke of York; and, after much persuasion, Harman was
heard to say, “Why, if it must be, then lower the topsail.” And so
did shorten sail, to the loss, as the Parliament will have it, of the
greatest victory that ever was, and which would have saved all the
expence of blood, and money, and honour, that followed; and this they do
resent, so as to put it to the question, whether Bruncker should not be
carried to the Tower: who do confess that, out of kindness to the Duke
of York’s safety, he did advise that they should do so, but did not
use the Duke of York’s name therein; and so it was only his error in
advising it, but the greatest theirs in taking it, contrary to order. At
last, it ended that it should be suspended till Harman comes home; and
then the Parliament-men do all tell me that it will fall heavy, and,
they think, be fatal to Bruncker or him. Sir W. Pen tells me he was gone
to bed, having been all day labouring, and then not able to stand, of
the goute, and did give order for the keeping the sails standing, as
they then were, all night. But, which I wonder at, he tells me that he
did not know the next day that they had shortened sail, nor ever
did enquire into it till about ten days ago, that this begun to be
mentioned; and, indeed, it is charged privately as a fault on the Duke
of York, that he did not presently examine the reason of the breach of
his orders, and punish it. But Cox tells me that he did finally refuse
it; and what prevailed with Harman he knows not, and do think that we
might have done considerable service on the enemy the next day, if this
had not been done. Thus this business ended to-day, having kept them
till almost two o’clock; and then I by coach with Sir W. Pen as far as
St. Clement’s, talking of this matter, and there set down; and I
walked to Sir G. Carteret’s, and there dined with him and several
Parliament-men, who, I perceive, do all look upon it as a thing certain
that the Parliament will enquire into every thing, and will be very
severe where they can find any fault. Sir W. Coventry, I hear, did this
day make a speech, in apology for his reading the letter of the Duke of
Albemarle, concerning the good condition which Chatham was in before
the enemy come thither: declaring his simple intention therein, without
prejudice to my Lord. And I am told that he was also with the Duke of
Albemarle yesterday to excuse it; but this day I do hear, by some of Sir
W. Coventry’s friends, that they think he hath done himself much injury
by making this man, and his interest, so much his enemy. After dinner, I
away to Westminster, and up to the Parliament-house, and there did
wait with great patience, till seven at night, to be called in to
the Committee, who sat all this afternoon, examining the business
of Chatham; and at last was called in, and told, that the least they
expected from us Mr. Wren had promised them, and only bade me to bring
all my fellow-officers thitherto attend them tomorrow, afternoon.
Sir Robert Brookes in the chair: methinks a sorry fellow to be there,
because a young man; and yet he seems to speak very well. I gone thence,
my cozen Pepys comes out to me, and walks in the Hall with me, and
bids me prepare to answer to every thing; for they do seem to lodge the
business of Chatham upon the Commissioners of the Navy, and they are
resolved to lay the fault heavy somewhere, and to punish it: and
prays me to prepare to save myself, and gives me hints what to prepare
against; which I am obliged to him for, and do begin to mistrust lest
some unhappy slip or other after all my diligence and pains may not be
found (which I can [not] foresee) that may prove as fatal to a man as
the constant course of negligence and unfaithfulness of other men. Here
we parted, and I to White Hall to Mr. Wren’s chamber, thereto advise
with him about the list of ships and commanders which he is to present
to the Parliament, and took coach (little Michell being with me, whom
I took with me from Westminster Hall), and setting him down in Gracious
street home myself, where I find my wife and the two Mercers and Willett
and W. Batelier have been dancing, but without a fidler. I had a little
pleasure in talking with these, but my head and heart full of thoughts
between hope and fear and doubts what will become of us and me
particularly against a furious Parliament. Then broke up and to bed,
and there slept pretty well till about four o’clock, and from that time
could not, but my thoughts running on speeches to the Parliament to
excuse myself from the blame which by other men’s negligence will
‘light, it may be, upon the office. This day I did get a list of the
fourteen particular miscarriages which are already before the Committee
to be examined; wherein, besides two or three that will concern this
Office much, there are those of the prizes, and that of Bergen, and not
following the Dutch ships, against my Lord Sandwich; that, I fear,
will ruine him, unless he hath very good luck, or they may be in better
temper before he can come to be charged: but my heart is full of fear
for him and his family. I hear that they do prosecute the business
against my Lord Chief Justice Keeling with great severity.