27th. [Sir] W. Pen and I to White Hall, and in the coach did begin our
discourse again about Balty, and he promises me to move it this very
day. He and I met my Lord Bruncker at Sir G. Carteret’s by appointment,
there to discourse a little business, all being likely to go to rack for
lack of money still. Thence to the Duke of York’s lodgings, and did our
usual business, and Sir W. Pen telling me that he had this morning spoke
of Balty to Sir W. Coventry, and that the thing was done, I did take
notice of it also to [Sir] W. Coventry, who told me that he had both
the thing and the person in his head before to have done it, which is a
double pleasure to me. Our business with the Duke being done, [Sir] W.
Pen and I towards the Exchequer, and in our way met Sir G. Downing going
to chapel, but we stopped, and he would go with us back to the Exchequer
and showed us in his office his chests full and ground and shelves full
of money, and says that there is L50,000 at this day in his office of
people’s money, who may demand it this day, and might have had it away
several weeks ago upon the late Act, but do rather choose to have
it continue there than to put it into the Banker’s hands, and I must
confess it is more than I should have believed had I not seen it, and
more than ever I could have expected would have arisen for this new Act
in so short a time, and if it do so now already what would it do if
the money was collected upon the Act and returned into the Exchequer so
timely as it ought to be. But it comes into my mind here to observe what
I have heard from Sir John Bankes, though I cannot fully conceive the
reason of it, that it will be impossible to make the Exchequer ever
a true bank to all intents, unless the Exchequer stood nearer the
Exchange, where merchants might with ease, while they are going about
their business, at all hours, and without trouble or loss of time, have
their satisfaction, which they cannot have now without much trouble, and
loss of half a day, and no certainty of having the offices open. By this
he means a bank for common practise and use of merchants, and therein I
do agree with him. Being parted from Sir W. Pen and [Sir] G. Downing, I
to Westminster Hall and there met Balty, whom I had sent for, and there
did break the business of my getting him the place of going again as
Muster-Master with Harman this voyage to the West Indys, which indeed
I do owe to Sir W. Pen. He is mighty glad of it, and earnest to fit
himself for it, but I do find, poor man, that he is troubled how to
dispose of his wife, and apparently it is out of fear of her, and his
honour, and I believe he hath received some cause of this his jealousy
and care, and I do pity him in it, and will endeavour to find out some
way to do, it for him. Having put him in a way of preparing himself
for the voyage, I did go to the Swan, and there sent for Jervas, my old
periwig maker, and he did bring me a periwig, but it was full of nits,
so as I was troubled to see it (it being his old fault), and did send
him to make it clean, and in the mean time, having staid for him a good
while, did go away by water to the Castle Taverne, by Exeter House, and
there met Sir W. Batten, [Sir] W. Pen, and several others, among the
rest Sir Ellis Layton, who do apply himself to discourse with me, and
I think by his discourse, out of his opinion of my interest in Sir W.
Coventry, the man I find a wonderful witty, ready man for sudden answers
and little tales, and sayings very extraordinary witty, but in the
bottom I doubt he is not so. Yet he pretends to have studied men, and
the truth is in several that I do know he did give me a very inward
account of them. But above all things he did give me a full account,
upon my demand, of this judge of the Admiralty, Judge Jenkins; who, he
says, is a man never practised in this Court, but taken merely for his
merit and ability’s sake from Trinity Hall, where he had always lived;
only by accident the business of the want of a Judge being proposed to
the present Archbishop of Canterbury that now is, he did think of this
man and sent for him up: and here he is, against the ‘gre’ and content
of the old Doctors, made judge, but is a very excellent man both for
judgment and temper, yet majesty enough, and by all men’s report, not to
be corrupted. After dinner to the Court, where Sir Ellis Layton did make
a very silly motion in our behalf, but did neither hurt nor good. After
him Walker and Wiseman; and then the judge did pronounce his sentence;
for some part of the goods and ship, and the freight of the whole, to
be free, and returned and paid by us; and the remaining, which was the
greater part, to be ours. The loss of so much troubles us, but we have
got a pretty good part, thanks be to God! So we are not displeased nor
yet have cause to triumph, as we did once expect. Having seen the end
of this, I being desirous to be at home to see the issue of any country
letters about my mother, which I expect shall give me tidings of her
death, I directly home and there to the office, where I find no letter
from my father or brother, but by and by the boy tells me that his
mistress sends me word that she hath opened my letter, and that she is
loth to send me any more news. So I home, and there up to my wife in
our chamber, and there received from my brother the newes of my mother’s
dying on Monday, about five or six o’clock in the afternoon, and that
the last time she spoke of her children was on Friday last, and her
last words were, “God bless my poor Sam!” The reading hereof did set me
a-weeping heartily, and so weeping to myself awhile, and my wife also to
herself, I then spoke to my wife respecting myself, and indeed, having
some thoughts how much better both for her and us it is than it
might have been had she outlived my father and me or my happy present
condition in the world, she being helpless, I was the sooner at ease in
my mind, and then found it necessary to go abroad with my wife to look
after the providing mourning to send into the country, some to-morrow,
and more against Sunday, for my family, being resolved to put myself
and wife, and Barker and Jane, W. Hewer and Tom, in mourning, and my
two under-mayds, to give them hoods and scarfs and gloves. So to my
tailor’s, and up and down, and then home and to my office a little,
and then to supper and to bed, my heart sad and afflicted, though my
judgment at ease.