1667.]--neither of us getting any hurt; nor could the coach have got
much hurt had we been in it; but, however, there was cause enough for us
to do what we could to save ourselves. So being all dusty, we put into
the Castle tavern, by the Savoy, and there brushed ourselves, and then
to White Hall with our fellows to attend the Council, by order upon some
proposition of my Lord Anglesey, we were called in. The King there: and
it was about considering how the fleete might be discharged at their
coming in shortly (the peace being now ratified, and it takes place on
Monday next, which Sir W. Coventry said would make some clashing between
some of us twenty to one, for want of more warning, but the wind has
kept the boats from coming over), whether by money or tickets, and cries
out against tickets, but the matter was referred for us to provide
an answer to, which we must do in a few days. So we parted, and I to
Westminster to the Exchequer, to see what sums of money other people
lend upon the Act; and find of all sizes from L1000 to L100 nay, to L50,
nay, to L20, nay, to L5: for I find that one Dr. Reade, Doctor of Law,
gives no more, and others of them L20; which is a poor thing, methinks,
that we should stoop so low as to borrow such sums. Upon the whole, I
do think to lend, since I must lend, L300, though, God knows! it is much
against my will to lend any, unless things were in better condition, and
likely to continue so. Thence home and there to dinner, and after dinner
by coach out again, setting my wife down at Unthanke’s, and I to the
Treasury-chamber, where I waited, talking with Sir G. Downing, till the
Lords met. He tells me how he will make all the Exchequer officers, of
one side and t’other, to lend the King money upon the Act; and that the
least clerk shall lend money, and he believes the least will L100: but
this I do not believe. He made me almost ashamed that we of the Navy had
not in all this time lent any; so that I find it necessary I should, and
so will speedily do it, before any of my fellows begin, and lead me to a
bigger sum. By and by the Lords come; and I perceive Sir W. Coventry is
the man, and nothing done till he comes. Among other things, I hear him
observe, looking over a paper, that Sir John Shaw is a miracle of a man,
for he thinks he executes more places than any man in England; for there
he finds him a Surveyor of some of the King’s woods, and so reckoned up
many other places, the most inconsistent in the world. Their business
with me was to consider how to assigne such of our commanders as will
take assignements upon the Act for their wages; and the consideration
thereof was referred to me to give them an answer the next sitting:
which is a horrid poor thing: but they scruple at nothing of honour in
the case. So away hence, and called my wife, and to the King’s house,
and saw “The Mayden Queene,” which pleases us mightily; and then away,
and took up Mrs. Turner at her door, and so to Mile End, and there
drank, and so back to her house, it being a fine evening, and there
supped. The first time I ever was there since they lived there; and she
hath all things so neat and well done, that I am mightily pleased with
her, and all she do. So here very merry, and then home and to bed, my
eyes being very bad. I find most people pleased with their being at
ease, and safe of a peace, that they may know no more charge or hazard
of an ill-managed war: but nobody speaking of the peace with any content
or pleasure, but are silent in it, as of a thing they are ashamed of;
no, not at Court, much less in the City.