13th. Up, lying long all alone (my wife lying for these two or three
days of sickness alone), thinking of my several businesses in hand,
and then rose and to the office, being in some doubt of having my cozen
Roger and Lord Hinchinbroke and Sir Thos. Crew by my cozens invitation
at dinner to-day, and we wholly unprovided. So I away to Westminster, to
the Parliament-door, to speak with Roger: and here I saw my Lord Keeling
go into the House to the barr, to have his business heard by the whole
House to-day; and a great crowd of people to stare upon him. Here I hear
that the Lords’ Bill for banishing and disabling my Lord Clarendon from
bearing any office, or being in the King’s dominions, and its being made
felony for any to correspond with him but his own children, is brought
to the Commons: but they will not agree to it, being not satisfied with
that as sufficient, but will have a Bill of Attainder brought in against
him: but they make use of this against the Lords, that they, that would
not think there was cause enough to commit him without hearing, will
have him banished without hearing. By and by comes out my cozen Roger to
me, he being not willing to be in the House at the business of my Lord
Keeling, lest he should be called upon to complain against him for his
abusing him at Cambridge, very wrongfully and shamefully, but not to
his reproach, but to the Chief justice’s in the end, when all the world
cried shame upon him for it. So he with me home, and Creed, whom I
took up by the way, going thither, and they to dine with me, and pretty
merry, and among other pieces of news, it is now fresh that the King
of Portugall is deposed, and his brother made King; and that my Lord
Sandwich is gone from Madrid with great honour to Lisbon, to make up, at
this juncture, a peace to the advantage, as the Spaniard would have it,
of Spain. I wish it may be for my Lord’s honour, if it be so; but it
seems my Lord is in mighty estimation in Spain. After dinner comes Mr.
Moore, and he and I alone a while, he telling me my Lord Sandwich’s
credit is like to be undone, if the bill of L200 my Lord Hinchingbroke
wrote to me about be not paid to-morrow, and that, if I do not help him
about it, they have no way but to let it be protested. So, finding that
Creed hath supplied them with L150 in their straits, and that this is no
bigger sum, I am very willing to serve my Lord, though not in this
kind; but yet I will endeavour to get this done for them, and the rather
because of some plate that was lodged the other day with me, by my
Lady’s order, which may be in part of security for my money, as I may
order it, for, for ought I see, there is no other to be hoped for. This
do trouble me; but yet it is good luck that the sum is no bigger. He
gone, I with my cozen Roger to Westminster Hall; and there we met
the House rising: and they have voted my Lord Chief Justice Keeling’s
proceedings illegal; but that, out of particular respect to him, and
the mediation of a great many, they have resolved to proceed no further
against him. After a turn or two with my cozen, I away with Sir W.
Warren, who met me here by my desire, and to Exeter House, and there to
counsel, to Sir William Turner, about the business of my bargain with my
Lady Batten; and he do give me good advice, and that I am safe, but
that there is a great many pretty considerations in it that makes it
necessary for me to be silent yet for a while till we see whether the
ship be safe or no; for she is drove to the coast of Holland, where she
now is in the Texell, so that it is not prudence for me yet to resolve
whether I will stand by the bargain or no, and so home, and Sir
W. Warren and I walked upon Tower Hill by moonlight a great while,
consulting business of the office and our present condition, which is
but bad, it being most likely that the Parliament will change all hands,
and so let them, so I may keep but what I have. Thence home, and there
spent the evening at home with my wife and entering my journal, and so
to supper and to bed, troubled with my parting with the L200, which I
must lend my Lord Sandwich to answer his bill of exchange.