26th. Up, and in dressing myself in my dressing chamber comes up Nell,
and I did play with her.... So being ready I to White Hall by water, and
there to the Lords Treasurers’ chamber, and there wait, and here it is
every body’s discourse that the Parliament is ordered to meet the 25th
of July, being, as they say, St. James’s day; which every creature is
glad of. But it is pretty to consider how, walking to the Old Swan
from my house, I met Sir Thomas Harvy, whom, asking the newes of the
Parliament’s meeting, he told me it was true, and they would certainly
make a great rout among us. I answered, I did not care for my part,
though I was ruined, so that the Commonwealth might escape ruin by it.
He answered, that is a good one, in faith; for you know yourself to be
secure, in being necessary to the office; but for my part, says he, I
must look to be removed; but then, says he, I doubt not but I shall have
amends made me; for all the world knows upon what terms I come in; which
is a saying that a wise man would not unnecessarily have said, I
think, to any body, meaning his buying his place of my Lord Barkely
[of Stratton]. So we parted, and I to White Hall, as I said before, and
there met with Sir Stephen Fox and Mr. Scawen, who both confirm the news
of the Parliament’s meeting. Here I staid for an order for my Tangier
money, L30,000, upon the 11 months’ tax, and so away to my Lord
Arlington’s office, and there spoke to him about Mr. Lanyon’s business,
and received a good answer, and thence to Westminster Hall and there
walked a little, and there met with Colonell Reames, who tells me of a
letter come last night, or the day before, from my Lord St. Albans, out
of France, wherein he says, that the King of France did lately fall out
with him, giving him ill names, saying that he had belied him to our
King, by saying that he had promised to assist our King, and to forward
the peace; saying that indeed he had offered to forward the peace at
such a time, but it was not accepted of, and so he thinks himself not
obliged, and would do what was fit for him; and so made him to go out
of his sight in great displeasure: and he hath given this account to the
King, which, Colonell Reymes tells me, puts them into new melancholy
at Court, and he believes hath forwarded the resolution of calling the
Parliament. Wherewith for all this I am very well contented, and so
parted and to the Exchequer, but Mr. Burgess was not in his office; so
alone to the Swan, and thither come Mr. Kinaston to me, and he and I
into a room and there drank and discoursed, and I am mightily pleased
with him for a most diligent and methodical man in all his business.
By and by to Burgess, and did as much as we could with him about our
Tangier order, though we met with unexpected delays in it, but such as
are not to be avoided by reason of the form of the Act and the disorders
which the King’s necessities do put upon it, and therefore away by
coach, and at White Hall spied Mr. Povy, who tells me, as a great
secret, which none knows but himself, that Sir G. Carteret hath
parted with his place of Treasurer of the Navy, by consent, to my Lord
Anglesey, and is to be Treasurer of Ireland in his stead; but upon what
terms it is I know not, but Mr. Povy tells it is so, and that it is in
his power to bring me to as great a friendship and confidence in my Lord
Anglesey as ever I was with [Sir] W. Coventry, which I am glad of, and
so parted, and I to my tailor’s about turning my old silk suit and cloak
into a suit and vest, and thence with Mr. Kinaston (whom I had set down
in the Strand and took up again at the Temple gate) home, and there to
dinner, mightily pleased with my wife’s playing on the flageolet, and so
after dinner to the office. Such is the want already of coals, and the
despair of having any supply, by reason of the enemy’s being abroad, and
no fleete of ours to secure, that they are come, as Mr. Kinaston tells
me, at this day to L5 10s. per chaldron. All the afternoon busy at
the office. In the evening with my wife and Mercer took coach and to
Islington to the Old House, and there eat and drank and sang with great
pleasure, and then round by Hackney home with great pleasure, and when
come home to bed, my stomach not being well pleased with the cream we
had to-night.