11th (Lord’s day). Up by four o’clock, and ready with Mrs. Turner to
take coach before five; which we did, and set on our journey, and got
to the Wells at Barnett by seven o’clock, and there found many people
a-drinking; but the morning is a very cold morning, so as we were very
cold all the way in the coach. Here we met Joseph Batelier, and I talked
with him, and here was W. Hewer also, and his uncle Steventon: so,
after drinking three glasses and the women nothing, we back by coach to
Barnett, where to the Red Lyon, where we ‘light, and went up into the
great Room, and there drank, and eat some of the best cheese-cakes
that ever I eat in my life, and so took coach again, and W. Hewer
on horseback with us, and so to Hatfield, to the inn, next my Lord
Salisbury’s house, and there rested ourselves, and drank, and bespoke
dinner; and so to church, it being just church-time, and there we find
my Lord and my Lady Sands and several fine ladies of the family, and a
great many handsome faces and genteel persons more in the church, and
did hear a most excellent good sermon, which pleased me mightily, and
very devout; it being upon, the signs of saving grace, where it is in
a man, and one sign, which held him all this day, was, that where that
grace was, there is also the grace of prayer, which he did handle very
finely. In this church lies the former Lord of Salisbury, Cecil, buried
in a noble tomb. So the church being done, we to our inn, and there
dined very well, and mighty merry; and as soon as we had dined we walked
out into the Park through the fine walk of trees, and to the Vineyard,
and there shewed them that, which is in good order, and indeed a place
of great delight; which, together with our fine walk through the Park,
was of as much pleasure as could be desired in the world for country
pleasure and good ayre. Being come back, and weary with the walk, for
as I made it, it was pretty long, being come back to our inne, there the
women had pleasure in putting on some straw hats, which are much worn in
this country, and did become them mightily, but especially my wife. So,
after resting awhile, we took coach again, and back to Barnett, where
W. Hewer took us into his lodging, which is very handsome, and there
did treat us very highly with cheesecakes, cream, tarts, and other good
things; and then walked into the garden, which was pretty, and there
filled my pockets full of filberts, and so with much pleasure. Among
other things, I met in this house with a printed book of the Life of O.
Cromwell, to his honour as a soldier and politician, though as a rebell,
the first of that kind that ever I saw, and it is well done. Took coach
again, and got home with great content, just at day shutting in, and
so as soon as home eat a little and then to bed, with exceeding great
content at our day’s work.