18th. Up, and did this morning dally with Nell... which I was afterward
troubled for. To the office, and there all the morning. Peg Pen come
to see me, and I was glad of it, and did resolve to have tried her this
afternoon, but that there was company with elle at my home, whither I
got her. Dined at home, W. Hewer with me, and then to the office, and
to my Lady Pen’s, and did find occasion for Peg to go home with me to my
chamber, but there being an idle gentleman with them, he went with us,
and I lost my hope. So to the office, and by and by word was brought me
that Commissioner Pett is brought to the Tower, and there laid up close
prisoner; which puts me into a fright, lest they may do the same with us
as they do with him. This puts me upon hastening what I am doing with
my people, and collecting out of my papers our defence. Myself got Fist,
Sir W. Batten’s clerk, and busy with him writing letters late, and then
home to supper and to read myself asleep, after piping, and so to bed.
Great newes to-night of the blowing up of one of the Dutch greatest
ships, while a Council of War was on board: the latter part, I doubt,
is not so, it not being confirmed since; but the former, that they had a
ship blown up, is said to be true. This evening comes Sir G. Carteret
to the office, to talk of business at Sir W. Batten’s; where all to be
undone for want of money, there being none to pay the Chest at their
publique pay the 24th of this month, which will make us a scorn to the
world. After he had done there, he and I into the garden, and walked;
and the greatest of our discourse is, his sense of the requisiteness of
his parting with his being Treasurer of the Navy, if he can, on any
good terms. He do harp upon getting my Lord Bruncker to take it on half
profit, but that he is not able to secure him in paying him so much.
But the thing I do advise him to do by all means, and he resolves on it,
being but the same counsel which I intend to take myself. My Lady Jem
goes down to Hinchingbroke to lie down, because of the troubles of the
times here. He tells me he is not sure that the King of France will not
annoy us this year, but that the Court seems [to] reckon upon it as a
thing certain, for that is all that I and most people are afeard of this
year. He tells me now the great question is, whether a Parliament or
no Parliament; and says the Parliament itself cannot be thought able at
present to raise money, and therefore it will be to no purpose to call
one. I hear this day poor Michell’s child is dead.