27th. Up, and by water to White Hall, and there walked with Creed in the
Matted gallery till by and by a Committee for Tangier met: the Duke of
York there; and there I did discourse over to them their condition as to
money, which they were all mightily, as I could desire, satisfied with,
but the Duke of Albemarle, who takes the part of the Guards against
us in our supplies of money, which is an odd consideration for a dull,
heavy blockhead as he is, understanding no more of either than a goose:
but the ability and integrity of Sir W. Coventry, in all the King’s
concernments, I do and must admire. After the Committee up, I and Sir
W. Coventry walked an hour in the gallery, talking over many businesses,
and he tells me that there are so many things concur to make him and
his Fellow Commissioners unable to go through the King’s work that he
do despair of it, every body becoming an enemy to them in their
retrenchments, and the King unstable, the debts great and the King’s
present occasions for money great and many and pressing, the bankers
broke and every body keeping in their money, while the times are
doubtful what will stand. But he says had they come in two years ago
they doubt not to have done what the King would by this time, or were
the King in the condition as heretofore, when the Chancellor was great,
to be able to have what sums of money they pleased of the Parliament,
and then the ill administration was such that instead of making good use
of this power and money he suffered all to go to ruin. But one such
sum now would put all upon their legs, and now the King would have the
Parliament give him money when they are in an ill humour and will not be
willing to give any, nor are very able, and besides every body distrusts
what they give the King will be lost; whereas six months hence, when
they see that the King can live without them, and is become steady,
and to manage what he has well, he doubts not but their doubts would be
removed, and would be much more free as well as more able to give him
money. He told me how some of his enemies at the Duke of York’s had
got the Duke of York’s commission for the Commissioners of his estate
changed, and he and Brouncker and Povy left out: that this they did do
to disgrace and impose upon him at this time; but that he, though he
values not the thing, did go and tell the Duke of York what he heard,
and that he did not think that he had given him any reason to do this,
out of his belief that he would not be as faithful and serviceable to
him as the best of those that have got him put out. Whereupon the Duke
of York did say that it arose only from his not knowing whether now he
would have time to regard his affairs; and that, if he should, he would
put him into the commission with his own hand, though the commission be
passed. He answered that he had been faithful to him, and done him good
service therein, so long as he could attend it; and if he had been able
to have attended it more, he would not have enriched himself with such
and such estates as my Lord Chancellor hath got, that did properly
belong to his Royal Highness, as being forfeited to the King, and so by
the King’s gift given to the Duke of York. Hereupon the Duke of York did
call for the commission, and hath since put him in. This he tells me he
did only to show his enemies that he is not so low as to be trod on by
them, or the Duke hath any so bad opinion of him as they would think.
Here we parted, and I with Sir H. Cholmly went and took a turn into
the Park, and there talked of several things, and about Tangier
particularly, and of his management of his business, and among other
discourse about the method he will leave his accounts in if he should
suddenly die, he says there is nothing but what is easily understood,
but only a sum of L500 which he has entered given to E. E. S., which
in great confidence he do discover to me to be my Lord Sandwich, at the
beginning of their contract for the Mole, and I suppose the rest did the
like, which was L1500, which would appear a very odd thing for my Lord
to be a profiter by the getting of the contract made for them. But here
it puts me into thoughts how I shall own my receiving of L200 a year
from him, but it is his gift, I never asked of him, and which he did to
Mr. Povy, and so there is no great matter in it. Thence to other talk.
He tells me that the business of getting the Duchess of Richmond to
Court is broke off, the Duke not suffering it; and thereby great trouble
is brought among the people that endeavoured it, and thought they had
compassed it. And, Lord! to think that at this time the King should mind
no other cares but these! He tells me that my Lord of Canterbury is a
mighty stout man, and a man of a brave, high spirit, and cares not for
this disfavour that he is under at Court, knowing that the King cannot
take away his profits during his life, and therefore do not value it.

     [This character of Archbishop Sheldon does not tally with the
     scandal that Pepys previously reported of him.  Burnet has some
     passages of importance on this in his “Own Time,” Book II. He
     affirms that Charles’s final decision to throw over Clarendon was
     caused by the Chancellor’s favouring Mrs. Stewart’s marriage with
     the Duke of Richmond.  The king had a conference with Sheldon on the
     removal of Clarendon, but could not convert the archbishop to his
     view.  Lauderdale told Burnet that he had an account of the
     interview from the king.  “The king and Sheldon had gone into such
     expostulations upon it that from that day forward Sheldon could
     never recover the king’s confidence.”]

Thence I home, and there to my office and wrote a letter to the Duke of
York from myself about my clerks extraordinary, which I have employed
this war, to prevent my being obliged to answer for what others do
without any reason demand allowance for, and so by this means I will be
accountable for none but my own, and they shall not have them but upon
the same terms that I have, which is a profession that with these helps
they will answer to their having performed their duties of their places.
So to dinner, and then away by coach to the Temple, and then for speed
by water thence to White Hall, and there to our usual attending the Duke
of York, and did attend him, where among other things I did present and
lodge my letter, and did speed in it as I could wish. Thence home with
Sir W. Pen and Comm. Middleton by coach, and there home and to cards
with my wife, W. Hewer, Mercer, and the girle, and mighty pleasant all
the evening, and so to bed with my wife, which I have not done since her
being ill for three weeks or thereabouts.