2nd. Up, but before I rose my wife fell into angry discourse of my
kindness yesterday to Mrs. Knipp, and leading her, and sitting in the
coach hand in hand, and my arm about her middle, and in some bad words
reproached me with it. I was troubled, but having much business in my
head and desirous of peace rose and did not provoke her. So she up and
come to me and added more, and spoke basely of my father, who I perceive
did do something in the country, at her last being there, that did not
like her, but I would not enquire into anything, but let her talk, and
when ready away to the Office I went, where all the morning I was,
only Mr. Gawden come to me, and he and I home to my chamber, and there
reckoned, and there I received my profits for Tangier of him, and L250
on my victualling score. He is a most noble-minded man as ever I met
with, and seems to own himself much obliged to me, which I will labour
to make him; for he is a good man also: we talked on many good things
relating to the King’s service, and, in fine, I had much matter of joy
by this morning’s work, receiving above L400 of him, on one account or
other; and a promise that, though I lay down my victualling place, yet,
as long as he continues victualler, I shall be the better by him. To the
office again, and there evened all our business with Mr. Kinaston about
Colonel Norwood’s Bill of Exchange from Tangier, and I am glad of it,
for though he be a good man, yet his importunity tries me. So home to
dinner, where Mr. Hater with me and W. Hewer, because of their being in
the way after dinner, and so to the office after dinner, where and with
my Lord Bruneker at his lodgings all the afternoon and evening making up
our great account for the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, but not
so as pleased me yet. So at 12 at night home to supper and to bed, my
wife being gone in an ill humour to bed before me. This noon my wife
comes to me alone, and tells me she had those upon her and bid me
remember it. I asked her why, and she said she had a reason. I do think
by something too she said to-day, that she took notice that I had not
lain with her this half-year, that she thinks that I have some doubt
that she might be with child by somebody else. Which God knows never
entered into my head, or whether my father observed any thing at
Brampton with Coleman I know not. But I do not do well to let these
beginnings of discontents take so much root between us.