22nd. Up, and with Sir W. Batten and [Sir] J. Minnes to St. James’s,
where the first time I have been there since the enemy’s being with us,
where little business but lack of money, which now is so professed by
Sir W. Coventry as nothing is more, and the King’s whole business owned
to be at a stand for want of it. So up to my Lord Chancellor’s, where
was a Committee of Tangier in my Lord’s roome, where he is to hear
causes, where all the judges’ pictures hang up, very fine. Here I read
my letter to them, which was well received, and they did fall seriously
to discourse the want of money and other particulars, and to some pretty
good purpose. But to see how Sir W. Coventry did oppose both my
Lord Chancellor and the Duke of York himself, about the Order of the
Commissioners of the Treasury to me for not paying of pensions, and with
so much reason, and eloquence so natural, was admirable. And another
thing, about his pressing for the reduction of the charge of Tangier,
which they would have put off to another time; “But,” says he, “the King
suffers so much by the putting off of the consideration of reductions
of charge, that he is undone; and therefore I do pray you, sir, to his
Royal Highness, that when any thing offers of the kind, you will not let
it escape you.” Here was a great bundle of letters brought hither, sent
up from sea, from a vessel of ours that hath taken them after they had
been flung over by a Dutchman; wherein, among others, the Duke of York
did read the superscription of one to De Witt, thus “To the most wise,
foreseeing and discreet, These, &c.;” which, I thought with myself, I
could have been glad might have been duly directed to any one of them
at the table, though the greatest men in this kingdom. The Duke of
York, the Lord Chancellor, my Lord Duke of Albemarle, Arlington, Ashley,
Peterborough, and Coventry (the best of them all for parts), I perceive
they do all profess their expectation of a peace, and that suddenly, and
do advise of things accordingly, and do all speak of it (and expressly,
I remember, the Duke of Albemarle), saying that they hoped for it.
Letters were read at the table from Tangier that Guiland is wholly
lost, and that he do offer Arzill to us to deliver it to us. But Sir W.
Coventry did declare his opinion that we should have nothing to do
with it, and said that if Tangier were offered us now, as the King’s
condition is, he would advise against the taking it; saying, that the
King’s charge is too great, and must be brought down, it being, like the
fire of this City, never to be mastered till you have brought it under
you; and that these places abroad are but so much charge to the King,
and we do rather hitherto strive to greaten them than lessen them; and
then the King is forced to part with them, “as,” says he, “he did with
Dunkirke,” by my Lord Tiviott’s making it so chargeable to the King as
he did that, and would have done Tangier, if he had lived: I perceive he
is the only man that do seek the King’s profit, and is bold to deliver
what he thinks on every occasion. Having broke up here, I away with Mr.
Gawden in his coach to the ‘Change, and there a little, and then home
and dined, and then to the office, and by and by with my wife to White
Hall (she to Unthanke’s), and there met Creed and did a little business
at the Treasury chamber, and then to walk in Westminster Hall an hour
or two, with much pleasure reflecting upon our discourse to-day at the
Tangier meeting, and crying up the worth of Sir W. Coventry. Creed tells
me of the fray between the Duke of Buckingham at the Duke’s playhouse
the last Saturday (and it is the first day I have heard that they have
acted at either the King’s or Duke’s houses this month or six weeks) and
Henry Killigrew, whom the Duke of Buckingham did soundly beat and take
away his sword, and make a fool of, till the fellow prayed him to spare
his life; and I am glad of it; for it seems in this business the Duke of
Buckingham did carry himself very innocently and well, and I wish he had
paid this fellow’s coat well. I heard something of this at the ‘Change
to-day: and it is pretty to hear how people do speak kindly of the Duke
of Buckingham, as one that will enquire into faults; and therefore they
do mightily favour him. And it puts me in mind that, this afternoon,
Billing, the Quaker, meeting me in the Hall, come to me, and after a
little discourse did say, “Well,” says he, “now you will be all called
to an account;” meaning the Parliament is drawing near. This done I took
coach and took up my wife, and so home, and after a little at the office
I home to my chamber a while, and then to supper and to bed.