31st. Up, and there came young Mrs. Daniel in the morning as I expected
about business of her husband’s. I took her into the office to discourse
with her about getting some employment for him.... By water to White
Hall to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, the first time I ever
was there and I think the second that they have met at the Treasury
chamber there. Here I saw Duncomb look as big, and take as much state on
him, as if he had been born a lord. I was in with him about Tangier, and
at present received but little answer from them, they being in a cloud
of business yet, but I doubt not but all will go well under them. Here
I met with Sir H. Cholmly, who tells me that he is told this day by
Secretary Morris that he believes we are, and shall be, only fooled by
the French; and that the Dutch are very high and insolent, and do look
upon us as come over only to beg a peace; which troubles me very much,
and I do fear it is true. Thence to Sir G. Carteret at his lodgings;
who, I perceive, is mightily displeased with this new Treasury; and he
hath reason, for it will eclipse him; and he tells me that my Lord Ashly
says they understand nothing; and he says he believes the King do not
intend they shall sit long. But I believe no such thing, but that the
King will find such benefit by them as he will desire to have them
continue, as we see he hath done, in the late new Act that was so much
decried about the King; but yet the King hath since permitted it, and
found good by it. He says, and I believe, that a great many persons at
Court are angry at the rise of this Duncomb, whose father, he tells me,
was a long-Parliamentman, and a great Committee-man; and this fellow
used to carry his papers to Committees after him: he was a kind of an
atturny: but for all this, I believe this man will be a great man, in
spite of all. Thence I away to Holborne to Mr. Gawden, whom I met at
Bernard’s Inn gate, and straight we together to the Navy Office, where
we did all meet about some victualling business, and so home to dinner
and to the office, where the weather so hot now-a-days that I cannot but
sleep before I do any business, and in the evening home, and there, to
my unexpected satisfaction, did get my intricate accounts of interest,
which have been of late much perplexed by mixing of some moneys of Sir
G. Carteret’s with mine, evened and set right: and so late to supper,
and with great quiet to bed; finding by the balance of my account that I
am creditor L6900, for which the Lord of Heaven be praised!