9th. Up, and to the office, where sat all the morning busy. At noon home
to dinner, where Mrs. Pierce did continue with us and her boy (who I
still find every day more and more witty beyond his age), and did dine
with us, and by and by comes in her husband and a brother-in-law of his,
a parson, one of the tallest biggest men that ever I saw in my life. So
to the office, where a meeting extraordinary about settling the number
and wages of my Lord Bruncker’s clerks for his new work upon the
Treasurer’s accounts, but this did put us upon running into the business
of yesterday about Carcasse, wherein I perceive he is most dissatisfied
with me, and I am not sorry for it, having all the world but him of my
side therein, for it will let him know another time that he is not
to expect our submitting to him in every thing, as I think he did
heretofore expect. He did speak many severe words to me, and I returned
as many to him, so that I do think there cannot for a great while, be,
any right peace between us, and I care not a fart for it; but however,
I must look about me and mind my business, for I perceive by his threats
and enquiries he is and will endeavour to find out something against
me or mine. Breaking up here somewhat brokenly I home, and carried Mrs.
Pierce and wife to the New Exchange, and there did give her and myself
a pair of gloves, and then set her down at home, and so back again
straight home and thereto do business, and then to Sir W. Batten’s,
where [Sir] W. Pen and others, and mighty merry, only I have got a great
cold, and the scolding this day at the office with my Lord Bruncker hath
made it worse, that I am not able to speak. But, Lord! to see how kind
Sir W. Batten and his Lady are to me upon this business of my standing
by [Sir] W. Batten against Carcasse, and I am glad of it. Captain Cocke,
who was here to-night, did tell us that he is certain that yesterday a
proclamation was voted at the Council, touching the proclaiming of my
Lord Duke of Buckingham a traytor, and that it will be out on Monday. So
home late, and drank some buttered ale, and so to bed and to sleep. This
cold did most certainly come by my staying a little too long bare-legged
yesterday morning when I rose while I looked out fresh socks and thread
stockings, yesterday’s having in the night, lying near the window, been
covered with snow within the window, which made me I durst not put them
on.