25th. Up, and all the morning close till two o’clock, till I had not
time to eat my dinner, to make our answer ready for the Parliament this
afternoon, to shew how Commissioner Pett was singly concerned in the
executing of all orders from Chatham, and that we did properly lodge all
orders with him. Thence with Sir W. Pen to the Parliament Committee, and
there we all met, and did shew, my Lord Bruncker and I, our commissions
under the Great Seal in behalf of all the rest, to shew them our duties,
and there I had no more matters asked me, but were bid to withdraw, and
did there wait, I all the afternoon till eight at, night, while
they were examining several about the business of Chatham again, and
particularly my Lord Bruncker did meet with two or three blurs that he
did not think of. One from Spragg, who says that “The Unity” was ordered
up contrary to his order, by my Lord Bruncker and Commissioner Pett.
Another by Crispin, the waterman, who said he was upon “The Charles;”
 and spoke to Lord Bruncker coming by in his boat, to know whether they
should carry up “The Charles,” they being a great many naked men without
armes, and he told them she was well as she was. Both these have little
in them indeed, but yet both did stick close against him; and he is the
weakest man in the world to make his defence, and so is like to have
much fault laid on him therefrom. Spragg was in with them all the
afternoon, and hath much fault laid on him for a man that minded his
pleasure, and little else of his whole charge. I walked in the lobby,
and there do hear from Mr. Chichly that they were (the Commissioners
of the Ordnance) shrewdly put to it yesterday, being examined with all
severity and were hardly used by them, much otherwise than we, and did
go away with mighty blame; and I am told by every body that it is likely
to stick mighty hard upon them: at which every body is glad, because
of Duncomb’s pride, and their expecting to have the thanks of the House
whereas they have deserved, as the Parliament apprehends, as bad as bad
can be. Here is great talk of an impeachment brought in against my Lord
Mordaunt, and that another will be brought in against my Lord Chancellor
in a few days. Here I understand for certain that they have ordered
that my Lord Arlington’s letters, and Secretary Morrice’s letters of
intelligence, be consulted, about the business of the Dutch fleete’s
coming abroad, which is a very high point, but this they have done, but
in what particular manner I cannot justly say, whether it was not with
the King’s leave first asked. Here late, as I have said, and at last
they broke up, and we had our commissions again, and I do hear how
Birch is the high man that do examine and trouble every body with his
questions, and they say that he do labour all he can to clear Pett, but
it seems a witness has come in tonight, C. Millett, who do declare that
he did deliver a message from the Duke of Albemarle time enough for him
to carry up “The Charles,” and he neglected it, which will stick very
hard, it seems, on him. So Sir W. Pen and I in his coach home, and there
to supper, a good supper, and so weary, and my eyes spent, to bed.