7th. Up betimes, and did do several things towards the settling all
matters both of house and office in order for my journey this day, and
did leave my chief care, and the key of my closet, with Mr. Hater, with
directions what papers to secure, in case of fire or other accident; and
so, about nine o’clock, I, and my wife, and Willet, set out in a coach
I have hired, with four horses; and W. Hewer and Murford rode by us on
horseback; and so my wife and she in their morning gowns, very handsome
and pretty, and to my great liking. We set out, and so out at Allgate,
and so to the Green Man, and so on to Enfield, in our way seeing Mr.
Lowther and his lady in a coach, going to Walthamstow; and he told us
that he would overtake us at night, he being to go that way. So we
to Enfield, and there bayted, it being but a foul, bad day, and there
Lowther and Mr. Burford, an acquaintance of his, did overtake us, and
there drank and eat together; and, by and by, we parted, we going before
them, and very merry, my wife and girle and I talking, and telling
tales, and singing, and before night come to Bishop Stafford, where
Lowther and his friend did meet us again, and carried us to the
Raynedeere, where Mrs. Aynsworth,

     [Elizabeth Aynsworth, here mentioned, was a noted procurerss at
     Cambridge, banished from that town by the university authorities for
     her evil courses.  She subsequently kept the Rein Deer Inn at
     Bishops Stortford, at which the Vice-Chancellor, and some of the
     heads of colleges, had occasion to sleep, in their way to London,
     and were nobly entertained, their supper being served off plate.
     The next morning their hostess refused to make any charge, saying,
     that she was still indebted to the Vice-Chancellor, who, by driving
     her out of Cambridge, had made her fortune.  No tradition of this
     woman has been preserved at Bishops Stortford; but it appears, from
     the register of that parish, that she was buried there 26th of
     March, 1686.  It is recorded in the “History of Essex,” vol. iii.,
     (p. 130) 8vo., 1770, and in a pamphlet in the British Museum,
     entitled, “Boteler’s Case,” that she was implicated in the murder of
     Captain Wood, a Hertfordshire gentleman, at Manuden, in Essex, and
     for which offence a person named Boteler was executed at Chelmsford,