10th. Up; and news brought us that, the Dutch are come up as high as the
Nore; and more pressing orders for fireships. W. Batten, W. Pen, and
I to St. James’s; where the Duke of York gone this morning betimes, to
send away some men down to Chatham. So we three to White Hall, and met
Sir W. Coventry, who presses all that is possible for fire-ships. So
we three to the office presently; and thither comes Sir Fretcheville
Hollis, who is to command them all in some exploits he is to do with
them on the enemy in the River. So we all down to Deptford, and pitched
upon ships and set men at work: but, Lord! to see how backwardly things
move at this pinch, notwithstanding that, by the enemy’s being now come
up as high as almost the Hope, Sir J. Minnes, who has gone down to pay
some ships there, hath sent up the money; and so we are possessed of
money to do what we will with. Yet partly ourselves, being used to
be idle and in despair, and partly people that have been used to be
deceived by us as to money, won’t believe us; and we know not, though
we have it, how almost to promise it; and our wants such, and men out
of the way, that it is an admirable thing to consider how much the King
suffers, and how necessary it is in a State to keep the King’s service
always in a good posture and credit. Here I eat a bit, and then in the
afternoon took boat and down to Greenwich, where I find the stairs full
of people, there being a great riding

     [It was an ancient custom in Berkshire, when a man had beaten his
     wife, for the neighbours to parade in front of his house, for the
     purpose of serenading him with kettles, and horns and hand-bells,
     and every species of “rough music,” by which name the ceremony was
     designated.  Perhaps the riding mentioned by Pepys was a punishment
     somewhat similar.  Malcolm (“Manners of London”) quotes from the
     “Protestant Mercury,” that a porter’s lady, who resided near Strand
     Lane, beat her husband with so much violence and perseverance, that
     the poor man was compelled to leap out of the window to escape her
     fury.  Exasperated at this virago, the neighbours made a “riding,”
      i.e. a pedestrian procession, headed by a drum, and accompanied by a
     chemise, displayed for a banner.  The manual musician sounded the
     tune of “You round-headed cuckolds, come dig, come dig!” and nearly
     seventy coalheavers, carmen, and porters, adorned with large horns
     fastened to their heads, followed.  The public seemed highly pleased
     with the nature of the punishment, and gave liberally to the
     vindicators of injured manhood.--B.]

there to-day for a man, the constable of the town, whose wife beat him.
Here I was with much ado fain to press two watermen to make me a galley,
and so to Woolwich to give order for the dispatch of a ship I have taken
under my care to see dispatched, and orders being so given, I, under
pretence to fetch up the ship, which lay at Grays (the Golden Hand),

     [The “Golden Hand” was to have been used for the conveyance of the
     Swedish Ambassadors’ horses and goods to Holland.  In August, 1667,
     Frances, widow of Captain Douglas and daughter of Lord Grey,
     petitioned the king “for a gift of the prize ship Golden Hand, now
     employed in weighing the ships sunk at Chatham, where her husband
     lost his life in defence of the ships against the Dutch” (“Calendar
     of State Papers,” 1667, p. 430)]

did do that in my way, and went down to Gravesend, where I find the Duke
of Albemarle just come, with a great many idle lords and gentlemen, with
their pistols and fooleries; and the bulwarke not able to have stood
half an hour had they come up; but the Dutch are fallen down from the
Hope and Shell-haven as low as Sheernesse, and we do plainly at this
time hear the guns play. Yet I do not find the Duke of Albemarle intends
to go thither, but stays here to-night, and hath, though the Dutch
are gone, ordered our frigates to be brought to a line between the two
blockhouses; which I took then to be a ridiculous thing. So I away into
the town and took a captain or two of our ships (who did give me an
account of the proceedings of the Dutch fleete in the river) to the
taverne, and there eat and drank, and I find the townsmen had removed
most of their goods out of the town, for fear of the Dutch coming up to
them; and from Sir John Griffen, that last night there was not twelve
men to be got in the town to defend it: which the master of the house
tells me is not true, but that the men of the town did intend to stay,
though they did indeed, and so had he, at the Ship, removed their goods.
Thence went off to an Ostend man-of-war, just now come up, who met the
Dutch fleete, who took three ships that he come convoying hither from
him says they are as low as the Nore, or thereabouts. So I homeward, as
long as it was light reading Mr. Boyle’s book of Hydrostatics, which
is a most excellent book as ever I read, and I will take much pains to
understand him through if I can, the doctrine being very useful. When
it grew too dark to read I lay down and took a nap, it being a most
excellent fine evening, and about one o’clock got home, and after having
wrote to Sir W. Coventry an account of what I had done and seen (which
is entered in my letter-book), I to bed.