22nd. Up pretty betimes, my throat better, and so drest me, and to White
Hall to see Sir W. Coventry, returned from Portsmouth, whom I am almost
ashamed to see for fear he should have been told how often I have been
at plays, but it is better to see him at first than afterward. So walked
to the Old Swan and drank at Michell’s, and then to White Hall and over
the Park to St. James’s to [Sir] W. Coventry, where well received, and
good discourse. He seems to be sure of a peace; that the King of France
do not intend to set out a fleete, for that he do design Flanders.
Our Embassadors set out this week. Thence I over the Park to Sir G.
Carteret, and after him by coach to the Lord Chancellor’s house, the
first time I have been therein; and it is very noble, and brave pictures
of the ancient and present nobility, never saw better. Thence with him
to London, mighty merry in the way. Thence home, and find the boy out of
the house and office, and by and by comes in and hath been to Mercer’s.
I did pay his coat for him. Then to my chamber, my wife comes home with
linen she hath been buying of. I then to dinner, and then down the river
to Greenwich, and the watermen would go no further. So I turned them
off, giving them nothing, and walked to Woolwich; there did some
business, and met with Captain Cocke and back with him. He tells me our
peace is agreed on; we are not to assist the Spanyard against the French
for this year, and no restitution, and we are likely to lose Poleroone.

     [Among the State Papers is a document dated July 8th, 1667, in which
     we read: “At Breda, the business is so far advanced that the English
     have relinquished their pretensions to the ships Henry Bonaventure
     and Good Hope.  The matter sticks only at Poleron; the States have
     resolved not to part with it, though the English should have a right
     to it” (“Calendar,” 1667, p. 278).]

I know not whether this be true or no, but I am for peace on any terms.
He tells me how the King was vexed the other day for having no paper
laid him at the Council-table, as was usual; and Sir Richard Browne did
tell his Majesty he would call the person whose work it was to provide
it: who being come, did tell his Majesty that he was but a poor man, and
was out L400 or L500 for it, which was as much as he is worth; and that
he cannot provide it any longer without money, having not received
a penny since the King’s coming in. So the King spoke to my Lord
Chamberlain; and many such mementos the King do now-a-days meet withall,
enough to make an ingenuous man mad. I to Deptford, and there scolded
with a master for his ship’s not being gone, and so home to the office
and did business till my eyes are sore again, and so home to sing, and
then to bed, my eyes failing me mightily: