7th. So up, and to the office, my head full of Carcasse’s business; then
hearing that Knipp is at my house, I home, and it was about a ticket for
a friend of hers. I do love the humour of the jade very well. So to
the office again, not being able to stay, and there about noon my Lord
Bruncker did begin to talk of Carcasse’s business. Only Commissioner
Pett, my Lord, and I there, and it was pretty to see how Pett hugged the
occasion of having anything against Sir W. Batten, which I am not much
troubled at, for I love him not neither. Though I did really endeavour
to quash it all I could, because I would prevent their malice taking
effect. My Lord I see is fully resolved to vindicate Carcasse, though
to the undoing of Sir W. Batten, but I believe he will find himself in a
mistake, and do himself no good, and that I shall be glad of, for though
I love the treason I hate the traitor. But he is vexed at my moving it
to the Duke of York yesterday, which I answered well, so as I think
he could not answer. But, Lord! it is pretty to see how Pett hugs this
business, and how he favours my Lord Bruncker; who to my knowledge hates
him, and has said more to his disadvantage, in my presence, to the King
and Duke of York than any man in England, and so let them thrive one
with another by cheating one another, for that is all I observe among
them. Thence home late, and find my wife hath dined, and she and Mrs.
Hewer going to a play. Here was Creed, and he and I to Devonshire House,
to a burial of a kinsman of Sir R. Viner’s; and there I received a ring,
and so away presently to Creed, who staid for me at an alehouse hard by,
and thence to the Duke’s playhouse, where he parted, and I in and find
my wife and Mrs. Hewer, and sat by them and saw “The English Princesse,
or Richard the Third;” a most sad, melancholy play, and pretty good; but
nothing eminent in it, as some tragedys are; only little Mis. Davis did
dance a jig after the end of the play, and there telling the next day’s
play; so that it come in by force only to please the company to see
her dance in boy’s ‘clothes; and, the truth is, there is no comparison
between Nell’s dancing the other day at the King’s house in boy’s
clothes and this, this being infinitely beyond the other. Mere was Mr.
Clerke and Pierce, to whom one word only of “How do you,” and so
away home, Mrs. Hewer with us, and I to the office and so to [Sir] W.
Batten’s, and there talked privately with him and [Sir] W. Pen about
business of Carcasse against tomorrow, wherein I think I did give them
proof enough of my ability as well as friendship to [Sir] W. Batten, and
the honour of the office, in my sense of the rogue’s business. So back
to finish my office business, and then home to supper, and to bed. This
day, Commissioner Taylor come to me for advice, and would force me to
take ten pieces in gold of him, which I had no mind to, he being become
one of our number at the Board. This day was reckoned by all people the
coldest day that ever was remembered in England; and, God knows! coals
at a very great price.