9th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen in a hackney-coach to
White Hall, the way being most horribly bad upon the breaking up of the
frost, so as not to be passed almost. There did our usual [business]
with the Duke of York, and here I do hear, by my Lord Bruncker, that for
certain Sir W. Coventry hath resigned his place of Commissioner; which I
believe he hath done upon good grounds of security to himself, from all
the blame which must attend our office this next year; but I fear the
King will suffer by it. Thence to Westminster Hall, and there to the
conference of the Houses about the word “Nuisance,”

     [In the “Bill against importing Cattle from Ireland and other parts
     beyond the Seas,” the Lords proposed to insert “Detriment and
     Mischief” in place of “Nuisance,” but the Commons stood to their
     word, and gained their way.  The Lords finally consented that
     “Nuisance” should stand in the Bill.]

which the Commons would have, and the Lords will not, in the Irish Bill.
The Commons do it professedly to prevent the King’s dispensing with it;
which Sir Robert Howard and others did expressly repeat often: viz.,
“the King nor any King ever could do any thing which was hurtful to
their people.” Now the Lords did argue, that it was an ill precedent,
and that which will ever hereafter be used as a way of preventing the
King’s dispensation with acts; and therefore rather advise to pass the
Bill without that word, and let it go, accompanied with a petition, to
the King, that he will not dispense with it; this being a more civil way
to the King. They answered well, that this do imply that the King should
pass their Bill, and yet with design to dispense with it; which is
to suppose the King guilty of abusing them. And more, they produce
precedents for it; namely, that against new buildings and about leather,
wherein the word “Nuisance” is used to the purpose: and further, that
they do not rob the King of any right he ever had, for he never had a
power to do hurt to his people, nor would exercise it; and therefore
there is no danger, in the passing this Bill, of imposing on his
prerogative; and concluded, that they think they ought to do this, so
as the people may really have the benefit of it when it is passed, for
never any people could expect so reasonably to be indulged something
from a King, they having already given him so much money, and are likely
to give more. Thus they broke up, both adhering to their opinions; but
the Commons seemed much more full of judgment and reason than the Lords.
Then the Commons made their Report to the Lords of their vote, that
their Lordships’ proceedings in the Bill for examining Accounts were
unparliamentary; they having, while a Bill was sent up to them from the
Commons about the business, petitioned his Majesty that he would do the
same thing by his Commission. They did give their reasons: viz., that
it had no precedent; that the King ought not to be informed of anything
passing in the Houses till it comes to a Bill; that it will wholly break
off all correspondence between the two Houses, and in the issue wholly
infringe the very use and being of Parliaments. Having left their
arguments with the Lords they all broke up, and I by coach to the
ordinary by the Temple, and there dined alone on a rabbit, and read
a book I brought home from Mrs. Michell’s, of the proceedings of the
Parliament in the 3rd and 4th year of the late King, a very good book
for speeches and for arguments of law. Thence to Faythorne, and bought
a head or two; one of them my Lord of Ormond’s, the best I ever saw,
and then to Arundell House, where first the Royall Society meet, by
the favour of Mr. Harry Howard, who was there, and has given us his
grandfather’s library, a noble gift, and a noble favour and undertaking
it is for him to make his house the seat for this college. Here was an
experiment shown about improving the use of powder for creating of force
in winding up of springs and other uses of great worth. And here was
a great meeting of worthy noble persons; but my Lord Bruncker, who
pretended to make a congratulatory speech upon their coming hither, and
in thanks to Mr. Howard, do it in the worst manner in the world, being
the worst speaker, so as I do wonder at his parts and the unhappiness of
his speaking. Thence home by coach and to the office, and then home to
supper, Mercer and her sister there, and to cards, and then to bed. Mr.
Cowling did this day in the House-lobby tell me of the many complaints
among people against Mr. Townsend in the Wardrobe, and advises me to
think of my Lord Sandwich’s concernment there under his care. He did
also tell me upon my demanding it, that he do believe there are some
things on foot for a peace between France and us, but that we shall be
foiled in it.