29th. Up, and with Sir W. Batten to St. James’s, to Sir W. Coventry’s
chamber; where, among other things, he come to me, and told me that he
had received my yesterday’s letters, and that we concurred very well in
our notions; and that, as to my place which I had offered to resign of
the Victualling, he had drawn up a letter at the same time for the Duke
of York’s signing for the like places in general raised during this war;
and that he had done me right to the Duke of York, to let him know that
I had, of my own accord, offered to resign mine. The letter do bid us to
do all things, particularizing several, for the laying up of the ships,
and easing the King of charge; so that the war is now professedly over.
By and by up to the Duke of York’s chamber; and there all the talk was
about Jordan’s coming with so much indiscretion, with his four little
frigates and sixteen fire-ships from Harwich, to annoy the enemy. His
failures were of several sorts, I know not which the truest: that he
come with so strong a gale of wind, that his grapplings would not hold;
that he did come by their lee; whereas if he had come athwart their
hawse, they would have held; that they did not stop a tide, and come up
with a windward tide, and then they would not have come so fast. Now,
there happened to be Captain Jenifer by, who commanded the Lily in this
business, and thus says that, finding the Dutch not so many as they
expected, they did not know but that there were more of them above, and
so were not so earnest to the setting upon these; that they did do what
they could to make the fire-ships fall in among the enemy; and, for
their lives, neither Sir J. Jordan nor others could, by shooting several
times at them, make them go in; and it seems they were commanded by some
idle fellows, such as they could of a sudden gather up at Harwich; which
is a sad consideration that, at such a time as this, where the saving
the reputation of the whole nation lay at stake, and after so long a
war, the King had not credit to gather a few able men to command these
vessels. He says, that if they had come up slower, the enemy would, with
their boats and their great sloops, which they have to row with a great
many men, they would, and did, come and cut up several of our fireships,
and would certainly have taken most of them, for they do come with a
great provision of these boats on purpose, and to save their men, which
is bravely done of them, though they did, on this very occasion, shew
great fear, as they say, by some men leaping overboard out of a great
ship, as these were all of them of sixty and seventy guns a-piece, which
one of our fireships laid on board, though the fire did not take. But
yet it is brave to see what care they do take to encourage their men to
provide great stores of boats to save them, while we have not credit
to find one boat for a ship. And, further, he told us that this new
way used by Deane, and this Sir W. Coventry observed several times, of
preparing of fire-ships, do not do the work; for the fire, not being
strong and quick enough to flame up, so as to take the rigging and
sails, lies smothering a great while, half an hour before it flames, in
which time they can get her off safely, though, which is uncertain, and
did fail in one or two this bout, it do serve to burn our own ships.
But what a shame it is to consider how two of our ships’ companies did
desert their ships for fear of being taken by their boats, our little
frigates being forced to leave them, being chased by their greater!
And one more company did set their ship on fire, and leave her; which
afterwards a Feversham fisherman come up to, and put out the fire, and
carried safe into Feversham, where she now is, which was observed by
the Duke of York, and all the company with him, that it was only want of
courage, and a general dismay and abjectness of spirit upon all our men;
and others did observe our ill management, and God Almighty’s curse
upon all that we have in hand, for never such an opportunity was of
destroying so many good ships of theirs as we now had. But to see how
negligent we were in this business, that our fleete of Jordan’s should
not have any notice where Spragg was, nor Spragg of Jordan’s, so as
to be able to meet and join in the business, and help one another; but
Jordan, when he saw Spragg’s fleete above, did think them to be another
part of the enemy’s fleete! While, on the other side, notwithstanding
our people at Court made such a secret of Jordan’s design that nobody
must know it, and even this Office itself must not know it; nor for my
part I did not, though Sir W. Batten says by others’ discourse to him
he had heard something of it; yet De Ruyter, or he that commanded this
fleete, had notice of it, and told it to a fisherman of ours that he
took and released on Thursday last, which was the day before our fleete
came to him. But then, that, that seems most to our disgrace, and which
the Duke of York did take special and vehement notice of, is, that when
the Dutch saw so many fire-ships provided for them, themselves lying,
I think, about the Nore, they did with all their great ships, with a
North-east wind, as I take it they said, but whatever it was, it was
a wind that we should not have done it with, turn down to the
Middle-ground; which the Duke of York observed, never was nor would have
been undertaken by ourselves. And whereas some of the company answered,
it was their great fear, not their choice that made them do it, the Duke
of York answered, that it was, it may be, their fear and wisdom that
made them do it; but yet their fear did not make them mistake, as we
should have done, when we have had no fear upon us, and have run our
ships on ground. And this brought it into my mind, that they managed
their retreat down this difficult passage, with all their fear, better
than we could do ourselves in the main sea, when the Duke of Albemarle
run away from the Dutch, when the Prince was lost, and the Royal Charles
and the other great ships come on ground upon the Galloper. Thus, in
all things, in wisdom, courage, force, knowledge of our own streams, and
success, the Dutch have the best of us, and do end the war with victory
on their side. The Duke of York being ready, we into his closet, but,
being in haste to go to the Parliament House, he could not stay. So we
parted, and to Westminster Hall, where the Hall full of people to see
the issue of the day, the King being come to speak to the House to-day.
One thing extraordinary was, this day a man, a Quaker, came naked
through the Hall, only very civilly tied about the privities to avoid
scandal, and with a chafing-dish of fire and brimstone burning upon his
head, did pass through the Hall, crying, “Repent! repent!” I up to
the Painted Chamber, thinking to have got in to have heard the King’s
speech, but upon second thoughts did not think it would be worth the
crowd, and so went down again into the Hall and there walked with
several, among others my Lord Rutherford, who is come out of Scotland,
and I hope I may get some advantage by it in reference to the business
of the interest of the great sum of money I paid him long since without
interest. But I did not now move him in it. But presently comes down the
House of Commons, the King having made then a very short and no pleasing
speech to them at all, not at all giving them thanks for their readiness
to come up to town at this busy time; but told them that he did think
he should have had occasion for them, but had none, and therefore did
dismiss them to look after their own occasions till October; and that he
did wonder any should offer to bring in a suspicion that he intended
to rule by an army, or otherwise than by the laws of the land, which he
promised them he would do; and so bade them go home and settle the minds
of the country in that particular; and only added, that he had made a
peace which he did believe they would find reasonable, and a good
peace, but did give them none of the particulars thereof. Thus they are
dismissed again to their general great distaste, I believe the greatest
that ever Parliament was, to see themselves so fooled, and the nation in
certain condition of ruin, while the King, they see, is only governed by
his lust, and women, and rogues about him. The Speaker, they found, was
kept from coming in the morning to the House on purpose, till after
the King was come to the House of Lords, for fear they should be doing
anything in the House of Commons to the further dissatisfaction of the
King and his courtiers. They do all give up the kingdom for lost that I
speak to; and do hear what the King says, how he and the Duke of York
do do what they can to get up an army, that they may need no more
Parliaments: and how my Lady Castlemayne hath, before the late breach
between her and the King, said to the King that he must rule by an army,
or all would be lost, and that Bab. May hath given the like advice to
the King, to crush the English gentlemen, saying that L300 a-year was
enough for any man but them that lived at Court. I am told that many
petitions were provided for the Parliament, complaining of the wrongs
they have received from the Court and courtiers, in city and country,
if the Parliament had but sat: and I do perceive they all do resolve to
have a good account of the money spent before ever they give a farthing
more: and the whole kingdom is everywhere sensible of their being
abused, insomuch that they forced their Parliament-men to come up
to sit; and my cozen Roger told me that (but that was in mirth) he
believed, if he had not come up, he should have had his house burned.
The kingdom never in so troubled a condition in this world as now;
nobody pleased with the peace, and yet nobody daring to wish for the
continuance of the war, it being plain that nothing do nor can thrive
under us. Here I saw old good Mr. Vaughan, and several of the great men
of the Commons, and some of them old men, that are come 200 miles,
and more, to attend this session-of Parliament; and have been at great
charge and disappointments in their other private business; and now all
to no purpose, neither to serve their country, content themselves, nor
receive any thanks from the King. It is verily expected by many of them
that the King will continue the prorogation in October, so as, if it be
possible, never to have [this] Parliament more. My Lord Bristoll took
his place in the House of Lords this day, but not in his robes; and when
the King come in, he withdrew but my Lord of Buckingham was there as
brisk as ever, and sat in his robes; which is a monstrous thing, that
a man proclaimed against, and put in the Tower, and all, and released
without any trial, and yet not restored to his places: But, above all, I
saw my Lord Mordaunt as merry as the best, that it seems hath done such
further indignities to Mr. Taylor’ since the last sitting of Parliament
as would hang [him], if there were nothing else, would the King do what
were fit for him; but nothing of that is now likely to be. After having
spent an hour or two in the hall, my cozen Roger and I and Creed to
the Old Exchange, where I find all the merchants sad at this peace and
breaking up of the Parliament, as men despairing of any good to the
nation, which is a grievous consideration; and so home, and there cozen
Roger and Creed to dinner with me, and very merry:--but among other
things they told me of the strange, bold sermon of Dr. Creeton
yesterday, before the King; how he preached against the sins of the
Court, and particularly against adultery, over and over instancing how
for that single sin in David, the whole nation was undone; and of our
negligence in having our castles without ammunition and powder when the
Dutch come upon us; and how we have no courage now a-days, but let our
ships be taken out of our harbour. Here Creed did tell us the story of
the dwell last night, in Coventgarden, between Sir H. Bellasses and Tom
Porter. It is worth remembering the silliness of the quarrell, and is
a kind of emblem of the general complexion of this whole kingdom at
present. They two it seems dined yesterday at Sir Robert Carr’s, where
it seems people do drink high, all that come. It happened that these
two, the greatest friends in the world, were talking together: and Sir
H. Bellasses talked a little louder than ordinary to Tom Porter, giving
of him some advice. Some of the company standing by said, “What! are
they quarrelling, that they talk so high?” Sir H. Bellasses hearing it,
said, “No!” says he: “I would have you know that I never quarrel, but
I strike; and take that as a rule of mine!”--“How?” says Tom Porter,
“strike! I would I could see the man in England that durst give me a
blow!” with that Sir H. Bellasses did give him a box of the eare; and
so they were going to fight there, but were hindered. And by and by Tom
Porter went out; and meeting Dryden the poet, told him of the business,
and that he was resolved to fight Sir H. Bellasses presently; for he
knew, if he did not, they should be made friends to-morrow, and then the
blow would rest upon him; which he would prevent, and desired Dryden
to let him have his boy to bring him notice which way Sir H. Bellasses
goes. By and by he is informed that Sir H. Bellasses’s coach was coming:
so Tom Porter went down out of the Coffee-house where he stayed for
the tidings, and stopped the coach, and bade Sir H. Bellasses come
out. “Why,” says H. Bellasses, “you will not hurt me coming out, will
you?”--“No,” says Tom Porter. So out he went, and both drew: and H.
Bellasses having drawn and flung away his scabbard, Tom Porter asked
him whether he was ready? The other answering him he was, they fell to
fight, some of their acquaintance by. They wounded one another, and H.
Bellasses so much that it is feared he will die: and finding himself
severely wounded, he called to Tom Porter, and kissed him, and bade him
shift for himself; “for,” says he, “Tom, thou hast hurt me; but I will
make shift to stand upon my legs till thou mayest withdraw, and the
world not take notice of you, for I would not have thee troubled for
what thou hast done.” And so whether he did fly or no I cannot tell:
but Tom Porter shewed H. Bellasses that he was wounded too: and they are
both ill, but H. Bellasses to fear of life. And this is a fine
example; and H. Bellasses a Parliament-man too, and both of them most
extraordinary friends! Among other discourse, my cozen Roger told us a
thing certain, that the Archbishop of Canterbury; that now is, do keep a
wench, and that he is as very a wencher as can be; and tells us it is
a thing publickly known that Sir Charles Sidley had got away one of the
Archbishop’s wenches from him, and the Archbishop sent to him to let him
know that she was his kinswoman, and did wonder that he would offer any
dishonour to one related to him. To which Sir Charles Sidley is said
to answer, “A pox take his Grace! pray tell his Grace that I believe he
finds himself too old, and is afraid that I should outdo him among his
girls, and spoil his trade.” But he makes no more of doubt to say that
the Archbishop is a wencher, and known to be so, which is one of the
most astonishing things that I have heard of, unless it be, what for
certain he says is true, that my Lady Castlemayne hath made a Bishop
lately, namely,--her uncle, Dr. Glenham, who, I think they say, is
Bishop of Carlisle; a drunken, swearing rascal, and a scandal to the
Church; and do now pretend to be Bishop of Lincoln, in competition with
Dr. Raynbow, who is reckoned as worthy a man as most in the Church for
piety and learning: which are things so scandalous to consider, that
no man can doubt but we must be undone that hears of them. After dinner
comes W. How and a son of Mr. Pagett’s to see me, with whom I drank, but
could not stay, and so by coach with cozen Roger (who before his going
did acquaint me in private with an offer made of his marrying of Mrs.
Elizabeth Wiles, whom I know; a kinswoman of Mr. Honiwood’s, an ugly old
maid, but a good housewife; and is said to have L2500 to her portion;
but if I can find that she hath but L2000, which he prays me to examine,
he says he will have her, she being one he hath long known intimately,
and a good housewife, and discreet woman; though I am against it in
my heart, she being not handsome at all) and it hath been the very bad
fortune of the Pepyses that ever I knew, never to marry an handsome
woman, excepting Ned Pepys and Creed, set the former down at the Temple
resolving to go to Cambridge to-morrow, and Creed and I to White Hall
to the Treasury chamber there to attend, but in vain, only here, looking
out of the window into the garden, I saw the King (whom I have not
had any desire to see since the Dutch come upon the coast first to
Sheerness, for shame that I should see him, or he me, methinks, after
such a dishonour) come upon the garden; with him two or three idle
Lords; and instantly after him, in another walk, my Lady Castlemayne,
led by Bab. May: at which I was surprised, having but newly heard the
stories of the King and her being parted for ever. So I took Mr. Povy,
who was there, aside, and he told me all, how imperious this woman is,
and hectors the King to whatever she will. It seems she is with child,
and the King says he did not get it: with that she made a slighting
“puh” with her mouth, and went out of the house, and never come in again
till the King went to Sir Daniel Harvy’s to pray her; and so she is
come to-day, when one would think his mind should be full of some other
cares, having but this morning broken up such a Parliament, with so much
discontent, and so many wants upon him, and but yesterday heard such
a sermon against adultery. But it seems she hath told the King, that
whoever did get it, he should own it; and the bottom of the quarrel is
this:--She is fallen in love with young Jermin who hath of late lain
with her oftener than the King, and is now going to marry my Lady
Falmouth; the King he is mad at her entertaining Jermin, and she is mad
at Jermin’s going to marry from her: so they are all mad; and thus
the kingdom is governed! and they say it is labouring to make breaches
between the Duke of Richmond and his lady that the King may get her to
him. But he tells me for certain that nothing is more sure than that the
King, and Duke of York, and the Chancellor, are desirous and labouring
all they can to get an army, whatever the King says to the Parliament;
and he believes that they are at last resolved to stand and fall all
three together: so that he says match of the Duke of York with the
Chancellor’s daughter hath undone the nation. He tells me also that the
King hath not greater enemies in the world than those of his own family;
for there is not an officer in the house almost but curses him for
letting them starve, and there is not a farthing of money to be raised
for the buying them bread. Having done talking with him I to Westminster
Hall, and there talked and wandered up and down till the evening to no
purpose, there and to the Swan, and so till the evening, and so home,
and there to walk in the garden with my wife, telling her of my losing
L300 a year by my place that I am to part with, which do a little
trouble me, but we must live with somewhat more thrift, and so home to
supper and to play on the flageolet, which do do very prettily, and so
to bed. Many guns were heard this afternoon, it seems, at White Hall
and in the Temple garden very plain; but what it should be nobody knows,
unless the Dutch be driving our ships up the river. To-morrow we shall
know.