20th. Up betimes, and comes my flagelette master to set me a new tune,
which I played presently, and shall in a month do as much as I desire
at it. He being gone, I to several businesses in my chamber, and then
by coach to the Commissioners of Excise, and so to Westminster Hall,
and there spoke with several persons I had to do with. Here among other
news, I hear that the Commissioners for the Treasury were named by the
King yesterday; but who they are nobody could tell: but the persons are
the Lord Chancellor, the two Secretaries, Lord Ashly, and others say
Sir W. Coventry and Sir John Duncomb, but all conclude the Duke of
Albemarle; but reports do differ, but will be known in a day or two.
Having done my business, I then homeward, and overtook Mr. Commander; so
took him into a coach with me, and he and I into Lincoln’s Inne Fields,
there to look upon the coach-houses to see what ground is necessary for
coach-house and horses, because of that that I am going about to do, and
having satisfied myself in this he and I to Mr. Hide’s to look upon the
ground again behind our house, and concluded upon his going along with
us to-morrow to see some stables, he thinking that we demand more than
is necessary. So away home, and then, I, it being a broken day, and had
power by my vows, did walk abroad, first through the Minorys, the first
time I have been over the Hill to the postern-gate, and seen the place,
since the houses were pulled down about that side of the Tower, since
the fire, to find where my young mercer with my pretty little woman to
his wife lives, who lived in Lumbard streete, and I did espy them, but
took no notice now of them, but may do hereafter. Thence down to the
Old Swan, and there saw Betty Michell, whom I have not seen since her
christening. But, Lord! how pretty she is, and looks as well as ever I
saw her, and her child (which I am fain to seem very fond of) is pretty
also, I think, and will be. Thence by water to Westminster Hall, and
there walked a while talking at random with Sir W. Doyly, and so away to
Mrs. Martin’s lodging, who was gone before, expecting me, and there je
hazer what je vellem cum her and drank, and so by coach home (but I have
forgot that I did in the morning go to the Swan, and there tumbling of
la little fille, son uncle did trouver her cum su neckcloth off, which
I was ashamed of, but made no great matter of it, but let it pass with
a laugh), and there spent the evening with my wife at our flagelets, and
so to supper, and after a little reading to bed. My wife still troubled
with her cold. I find it everywhere now to be a thing doubted whether
we shall have peace or no, and the captain of one of our ships that went
with the Embassadors do say, that the seamen of Holland to his hearing
did defy us, and called us English dogs, and cried out against peace,
and that the great people there do oppose peace, though he says the
common people do wish it.