3rd. Up, and with Sir W. Batten to White Hall to Sir W. Coventry’s
chamber, and there did receive the Duke’s order for Balty’s receiving of
the contingent money to be paymaster of it, and it pleases me the more
for that it is but L1500, which will be but a little sum for to try his
ability and honesty in the disposing of, and so I am the willinger to
trust and pass my word for him therein. By and by up to the Duke of
York, where our usual business, and among other things I read two most
dismal letters of the straits we are in (from Collonell Middleton and
Commissioner Taylor) that ever were writ in the world, so as the Duke
of York would have them to shew the King, and to every demand of money,
whereof we proposed many and very pressing ones, Sir G. Carteret could
make no answer but no money, which I confess made me almost ready to cry
for sorrow and vexation, but that which was the most considerable was
when Sir G. Carteret did say that he had no funds to raise money on; and
being asked by Sir W. Coventry whether the eleven months’ tax was not a
fund, and he answered, “No, that the bankers would not lend money upon
it.” Then Sir W. Coventry burst out and said he did supplicate his Royal
Highness, and would do the same to the King, that he would remember who
they were that did persuade the King from parting with the Chimney-money
to the Parliament, and taking that in lieu which they would certainly
have given, and which would have raised infallibly ready money; meaning
the bankers and the farmers of the Chimney-money, whereof Sir, G.
Carteret, I think, is one; saying plainly, that whoever did advise the
King to that, did, as much as in them lay, cut the King’s throat,
and did wholly betray him; to which the Duke of York did assent; and
remembered that the King did say again and again at the time, that he
was assured, and did fully believe, the money would be raised presently
upon a land-tax. This put as all into a stound; and Sir W. Coventry went
on to declare, that he was glad he was come to have so lately concern in
the Navy as he hath, for he cannot now give any good account of the
Navy business; and that all his work now was to be able to provide such
orders as would justify his Royal Highness in the business, when it
shall be called to account; and that he do do, not concerning himself
whether they are or can be performed, or no; and that when it comes to
be examined, and falls on my Lord Treasurer, he cannot help it, whatever
the issue of it shall be. Hereupon Sir W. Batten did pray him to keep
also by him all our letters that come from the office that may justify
us, which he says he do do, and, God knows, it is an ill sign when
we are once to come to study how to excuse ourselves. It is a sad
consideration, and therewith we broke up, all in a sad posture, the most
that ever I saw in my life. One thing more Sir W. Coventry did say
to the Duke of York, when I moved again, that of about L9000 debt to
Lanyon, at Plymouth, he might pay L3700 worth of prize-goods, that he
bought lately at the candle, out of this debt due to him from the King;
and the Duke of York, and Sir G: Carteret, and Lord Barkeley, saying,
all of them, that my Lord Ashly would not be got to yield to it, who
is Treasurer of the Prizes, Sir W. Coventry did plainly desire that it
might be declared whether the proceeds of the prizes were to go to the
helping on of the war, or no; and, if it were, how then could this be
denied? which put them all into another stound; and it is true, God
forgive us! Thence to the chappell, and there, by chance, hear that Dr.
Crew is to preach; and so into the organ-loft, where I met Mr. Carteret,
and my Lady Jemimah, and Sir Thomas Crew’s two daughters, and Dr. Childe
played; and Dr. Crew did make a very pretty, neat, sober, honest sermon;
and delivered it very readily, decently, and gravely, beyond his years:
so as I was exceedingly taken with it, and I believe the whole
chappell, he being but young; but his manner of his delivery I do like
exceedingly. His text was, “But seeke ye first the kingdom of God, and
his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.” Thence
with my Lady to Sir G. Carteret’s lodgings, and so up into the house,
and there do hear that the Dutch letters are come, and say that the
Dutch have ordered a passe to be sent for our Commissioners, and that it
is now upon the way, coming with a trumpeter blinded, as is usual. But I
perceive every body begins to doubt the success of the treaty, all their
hopes being only that if it can be had on any terms, the Chancellor will
have it; for he dare not come before a Parliament, nor a great many more
of the courtiers, and the King himself do declare he do not desire it,
nor intend it but on a strait; which God defend him from! Here I hear
how the King is not so well pleased of this marriage between the Duke
of Richmond and Mrs. Stewart, as is talked; and that he [the Duke] by a
wile did fetch her to the Beare, at the Bridge-foot, where a coach was
ready, and they are stole away into Kent, without the King’s leave; and
that the King hath said he will never see her more; but people do think
that it is only a trick. This day I saw Prince Rupert abroad in the
Vane-room, pretty well as he used to be, and looks as well, only
something appears to be under his periwigg on the crown of his head. So
home by water, and there find my wife gone abroad to her tailor’s, and I
dined alone with W. Hewer, and then to the office to draw up a memorial
for the Duke of York this afternoon at the Council about Lanyon’s
business. By and by we met by appointment at the office upon a reference
to Carcasses business to us again from the Duke of York, but a very
confident cunning rogue we have found him at length. He carried himself
very uncivilly to Sir W. Batten this afternoon, as heretofore, and his
silly Lord [Bruncker] pleaded for him, but all will not nor shall not do
for ought he shall give, though I love the man as a man of great parts
and ability. Thence to White Hall by water (only asking Betty Michell
by the way how she did), and there come too late to do any thing at the
Council. So by coach to my periwigg maker’s and tailor’s, and so home,
where I find my wife with her flageolet master, which I wish she would
practise, and so to the office, and then to Sir W. Batten’s, and then to
Sir W. Pen’s, talking and spending time in vain a little while, and
then home up to my chamber, and so to supper and to bed, vexed at two or
three things, viz. that my wife’s watch proves so bad as it do; the
ill state of the office; and Kingdom’s business; at the charge which my
mother’s death for mourning will bring me when all paid.