29th. Up, and by coach to St. James’s, where by and by up to the Duke
of York, where, among other things, our parson Mills having the offer of
another benefice by Sir Robert Brookes, who was his pupil, he by my
Lord Barkeley [of Stratton] is made one of the Duke’s Chaplains, which
qualifies him for two livings. But to see how slightly such things are
done, the Duke of York only taking my Lord Barkeley’s word upon saying,
that we the officers of the Navy do say he is a good man and minister of
our parish, and the Duke of York admits him to kiss his hand, but speaks
not one word to him; but so a warrant will be drawn from the Duke of
York to qualify him, and there’s an end of it. So we into the Duke’s
closett, where little to do, but complaint for want of money and a
motion of Sir W. Coventry’s that we should all now bethink ourselves
of lessening charge to the King, which he said was the only way he saw
likely to put the King out of debt, and this puts me upon thinking to
offer something presently myself to prevent its being done in a worse
manner without me relating to the Victualling business, which, as I may
order it, I think may be done and save myself something. Thence home,
and there settle to some accounts of mine in my chamber I all the
morning till dinner. My wife comes home from Woolwich, but did not dine
with me, going to dress herself against night, to go to Mrs. Pierce’s to
be merry, where we are to have Knepp and Harris and other good people.
I at my accounts all the afternoon, being a little lost in them as
to reckoning interest. Anon comes down my wife, dressed in her second
mourning, with her black moyre waistcoat, and short petticoat, laced
with silver lace so basely that I could not endure to see her, and with
laced lining, which is too soon, so that I was horrid angry, and went
out of doors to the office and there staid, and would not go to our
intended meeting, which vexed me to the blood, and my wife sent twice
or thrice to me, to direct her any way to dress her, but to put on her
cloth gown, which she would not venture, which made me mad: and so in
the evening to my chamber, vexed, and to my accounts, which I ended to
my great content, and did make amends for the loss of our mirth this
night, by getting this done, which otherwise I fear I should not have
done a good while else. So to bed.