20th (Lord’s day). Up, and put on my new tunique of velvett; which is
very plain, but good. This morning is brought to me an order for the
presenting the Committee of Parliament to-morrow with a list of the
commanders and ships’ names of all the fleetes set out since the war,
and particularly of those ships which were divided from the fleete with
Prince Rupert;

     [This question of the division of the fleet in May, 1666, was one
     over which endless controversy as to responsibility was raised.
     When Prince Rupert, with twenty ships, was detached to prevent the
     junction of the French squadron with the Dutch, the Duke of
     Albemarle was left with fifty-four ships against eighty belonging to
     the Dutch.  Albemarle’s tactics are praised by Captain Mahan.]

which gives me occasion to see that they are busy after that business,
and I am glad of it. So I alone to church, and then home, and there
Mr. Deane comes and dines with me by invitation, and both at and after
dinner he and I spent all the day till it was dark in discourse of
business of the Navy and the ground of the many miscarriages, wherein he
do inform me in many more than I knew, and I had desired him to put
them in writing, and many indeed they are and good ones; and also
we discoursed of the business of shipping, and he hath promised me a
draught of the ship he is now building, wherein I am mightily pleased.
This afternoon comes to me Captain O’Bryan, about a ship that the King
hath given him; and he and I to talk of the Parliament; and he tells
me that the business of the Duke of York’s slackening sail in the first
fight, at the beginning of the war, is brought into question, and Sir W.
Pen and Captain Cox are to appear to-morrow about it; and it is thought
will at last be laid upon Mr. Bruncker’s giving orders from the Duke of
York (which the Duke of York do not own) to Captain Cox to do it; but it
seems they do resent this very highly, and are mad in going through all
business, where they can lay any fault. I am glad to hear, that in the
world I am as kindly spoke of as any body; for, for aught I see, there
is bloody work like to be, Sir W. Coventry having been forced to produce
a letter in Parliament wherein the Duke of Albemarle did from Sheernesse
write in what good posture all things were at Chatham, and that the
chain was so well placed that he feared no attempt of the enemy: so
that, among other things, I see every body is upon his own defence, and
spares not to blame another to defend himself, and the same course I
shall take. But God knows where it will end! He gone, and Deane, I to
my chamber for a while, and then comes Pelling the apothecary to see
us, and sat and supped with me (my wife being gone to bed sick of the
cholique), and then I to bed, after supper. Pelting tells me that my
Lady Duchesse Albemarle was at Mrs. Turner’s this afternoon, she being
ill, and did there publickly talk of business, and of our Office; and
that she believed that I was safe, and had done well; and so, I thank
God! I hear every body speaks of me; and indeed, I think, without
vanity, I may expect to be profited rather than injured by this inquiry,
which the Parliament makes into business.