2nd. This day is kept in the City as a publick fast for the fire this
day twelve months: but I was not at church, being commanded, with the
rest, to attend the Duke of York; and, therefore, with Sir J. Minnes
to St. James’s, where we had much business before the Duke of York,
and observed all things to be very kind between the Duke of York and W.
Coventry, which did mightily joy me. When we had done, Sir W. Coventry
called me down with him to his chamber, and there told me that he is
leaving the Duke of York’s service, which I was amazed at. But he tells
me that it is not with the least unkindness on the Duke of York’s
side, though he expects, and I told him he was in the right, it will be
interpreted otherwise, because done just at this time; “but,” says he,
“I did desire it a good while since, and the Duke of York did, with much
entreaty, grant it, desiring that I would say nothing of it, that he
might have time and liberty to choose his successor, without being
importuned for others whom he should not like:” and that he hath chosen
Mr. Wren, which I am glad of, he being a very ingenious man; and so Sir
W. Coventry says of him, though he knows him little; but particularly
commends him for the book he writ in answer to “Harrington’s Oceana,”
 which, for that reason, I intend to buy. He tells me the true reason is,
that he, being a man not willing to undertake more business than he can
go through, and being desirous to have his whole time to spend upon the
business of the Treasury, and a little for his own ease, he did desire
this of the Duke of York. He assures me that the kindness with which he
goes away from the Duke of York is one of the greatest joys that ever
he had in the world. I used some freedom with him, telling him how the
world hath discoursed of his having offended the Duke of York, about
the late business of the Chancellor. He do not deny it, but says that
perhaps the Duke of York might have some reason for it, he opposing him
in a thing wherein he was so earnest but tells me, that, notwithstanding
all that, the Duke of York does not now, nor can blame him; for he tells
me that he was the man that did propose the removal of the Chancellor;
and that he did still persist in it, and at this day publickly owns it,
and is glad of it; but that the Duke of York knows that he did first
speak of it to the Duke of York, before he spoke to any mortal creature
besides, which was fair dealing: and the Duke of York was then of the
same mind with him, and did speak of it to the King; though since, for
reasons best known to himself, he was afterwards altered. I did then
desire to know what was the great matter that grounded his desire of the
Chancellor’s removal? He told me many things not fit to be spoken, and
yet not any thing of his being unfaithful to the King; but, ‘instar
omnium’, he told me, that while he was so great at the Council-board,
and in the administration of matters, there was no room for any body to
propose any remedy to what was amiss, or to compass any thing, though
never so good for the kingdom, unless approved of by the Chancellor, he
managing all things with that greatness which now will be removed, that
the King may have the benefit of others’ advice. I then told him that
the world hath an opinion that he hath joined himself with my Lady
Castlemayne’s faction in this business; he told me, he cannot help it,
but says they are in an errour: but for first he will never, while he
lives, truckle under any body or any faction, but do just as his own
reason and judgment directs; and, when he cannot use that freedom, he
will have nothing to do in public affairs but then he added, that he
never was the man that ever had any discourse with my Lady Castlemayne,
or with others from her, about this or any public business, or ever made
her a visit, or at least not this twelvemonth, or been in her lodgings
but when called on any business to attend the King there, nor hath had
any thing to do in knowing her mind in this business. He ended all with
telling me that he knows that he that serves a Prince must expect, and
be contented to stand, all fortunes, and be provided to retreat, and
that that he is most willing to do whenever the King shall please. And
so we parted, he setting me down out of his coach at Charing Cross, and
desired me to tell Sir W. Pen what he had told me of his leaving the
Duke of York’s service, that his friends might not be the last that know
it. I took a coach and went homewards; but then turned again, and to
White Hall, where I met with many people; and, among other things, do
learn that there is some fear that Mr. Bruncker is got into the King’s
favour, and will be cherished there; which will breed ill will between
the King and Duke of York, he lodging at this time in White Hall since
he was put away from the Duke of York: and he is great with Bab. May, my
Lady Castlemayne, and that wicked crew. But I find this denied by Sir
G. Carteret, who tells me that he is sure he hath no kindness from the
King; that the King at first, indeed, did endeavour to persuade the Duke
of York from putting him away; but when, besides this business of his
ill words concerning his Majesty in the business of the Chancellor, he
told him that he hath had, a long time, a mind to put him away for his
ill offices, done between him and his wife, the King held his peace, and
said no more, but wished him to do what he pleased with him; which was
very noble. I met with Fenn; and he tells me, as I do hear from some
others, that the business of the Chancellor’s had proceeded from
something of a mistake, for the Duke of York did first tell the King
that the Chancellor had a desire to be eased of his great trouble; and
that the King, when the Chancellor come to him, did wonder to hear him
deny it, and the Duke of York was forced to deny to the King that ever
he did tell him so in those terms: but the King did answer that he was
sure that he did say some such thing to him; but, however, since it had
gone so far, did desire him to be contented with it, as a thing very
convenient for him as well as for himself (the King), and so matters
proceeded, as we find. Now it is likely the Chancellor might, some time
or other, in a compliment or vanity, say to the Duke of York, that he
was weary of this burden, and I know not what; and this comes of it.
Some people, and myself among them, are of good hope from this change
that things are reforming; but there are others that do think but that
it is a hit of chance, as all other our greatest matters are, and that
there is no general plot or contrivance in any number of people what to
do next, though, I believe, Sir W. Coventry may in himself have further
designs; and so that, though other changes may come, yet they shall be
accidental and laid upon [not] good principles of doing good. Mr. May
shewed me the King’s new buildings, in order to their having of some old
sails for the closing of the windows this winter. I dined with Sir G.
Carteret, with whom dined Mr. Jack Ashburnham and Dr. Creeton, who
I observe to be a most good man and scholar. In discourse at dinner
concerning the change of men’s humours and fashions touching meats, Mr.
Ashburnham told us, that he remembers since the only fruit in request,
and eaten by the King and Queen at table as the best fruit, was the
Katharine payre, though they knew at the time other fruits of France
and our own country. After dinner comes in Mr. Townsend; and there I was
witness of a horrid rateing, which Mr. Ashburnham, as one of the Grooms
of the King’s Bedchamber, did give him for want of linen for the King’s
person; which he swore was not to be endured, and that the King would
not endure it, and that the King his father, would have hanged his
Wardrobe-man should he have been served so the King having at this day
no handkerchers, and but three bands to his neck, he swore. Mr. Townsend
answered want of money, and the owing of the linen-draper L5000; and
that he hath of late got many rich things made--beds, and sheets, and
saddles, and all without money, and he can go no further but still this
old man, indeed, like an old loving servant, did cry out for the King’s
person to be neglected. But, when he was gone, Townsend told me that
it is the grooms taking away the King’s linen at the quarter’s end, as
their fees, which makes this great want: for, whether the King can get
it or no, they will run away at the quarter’s end with what he hath had,
let the King get more as he can. All the company gone, Sir G. Carteret
and I to talk: and it is pretty to observe how already he says that
he did always look upon the Chancellor indeed as his friend, though he
never did do him any service at all, nor ever got any thing by him, nor
was he a man apt, and that, I think, is true, to do any man any kindness
of his own nature; though I do know that he was believed by all the
world to be the greatest support of Sir G. Carteret with the King of
any man in England: but so little is now made of it! He observes that
my Lord Sandwich will lose a great friend in him; and I think so too, my
Lord Hinchingbroke being about a match calculated purely out of respect
to my Lord Chancellor’s family. By and by Sir G. Carteret, and Townsend,
and I, to consider of an answer to the Commissioners of the Treasury
about my Lord Sandwich’s profits in the Wardrobe; which seem, as we make
them, to be very small, not L1000 a-year; but only the difference in
measure at which he buys and delivers out to the King, and then 6d. in
the pound from the tradesmen for what money he receives for him; but
this, it is believed, these Commissioners will endeavour to take away.
From him I went to see a great match at tennis, between Prince Rupert
and one Captain Cooke, against Bab. May and the elder Chichly; where the
King was, and Court; and it seems are the best players at tennis in the
nation. But this puts me in mind of what I observed in the morning, that
the King, playing at tennis, had a steele-yard carried to him, and I
was told it was to weigh him after he had done playing; and at noon
Mr. Ashburnham told me that it is only the King’s curiosity, which he
usually hath of weighing himself before and after his play, to see how
much he loses in weight by playing: and this day he lost 4 lbs. Thence
home and took my wife out to Mile End Green, and there I drank, and so
home, having a very fine evening. Then home, and I to Sir W. Batten and
[Sir] W. Pen, and there discoursed of Sir W. Coventry’s leaving the Duke
of York, and Mr. Wren’s succeeding him. They told me both seriously,
that they had long cut me out for Secretary to the Duke of York, if ever
[Sir] W. Coventry left him; which, agreeing with what I have heard from
other hands heretofore, do make me not only think that something of that
kind hath been thought on, but do comfort me to see that the world hath
such an esteem of my qualities as to think me fit for any such thing.
Though I am glad, with all my heart, that I am not so; for it would
never please me to be forced to the attendance that that would require,
and leave my wife and family to themselves, as I must do in such a case;
thinking myself now in the best place that ever man was in to please his
own mind in, and, therefore, I will take care to preserve it. So to bed,
my cold remaining though not so much upon me. This day Nell, an old tall
maid, come to live with us, a cook maid recommended by Mr. Batelier.