12th. Up very betimes to our business at the office, there hiring of
more fire-ships; and at it close all the morning. At noon home, and Sir
W. Pen dined with us. By and by, after dinner, my wife out by coach to
see her mother; and I in another, being afraid, at this busy time, to be
seen with a woman in a coach, as if I were idle, towards The. Turner’s;
but met Sir W. Coventry’s boy; and there in his letter find that the
Dutch had made no motion since their taking Sheernesse; and the Duke
of Albemarle writes that all is safe as to the great ships against any
assault, the boom and chaine being so fortified; which put my heart into
great joy.

     [There had been correspondence with Pett respecting this chain in
     April and May.  On the 10th May Pett wrote to the Navy
     Commissioners, “The chain is promised to be dispatched to-morrow,
     and all things are ready for fixing it.”  On the 11th June the Dutch
     “got twenty or twenty-two ships over the narrow part of the river at
     Chatham, where ships had been sunk; after two and a half hours’
     fighting one guard-ship after another was fired and blown up, and
     the enemy master of the chain” (“Calendar of State Papers,” 1667,
     pp. 58, 87, 215).]

When I come to Sir W: Coventry’s chamber, I find him abroad; but his
clerk, Powell, do tell me that ill newes is come to Court of the Dutch
breaking the Chaine at Chatham; which struck me to the heart. And to
White Hall to hear the truth of it; and there, going up the back-stairs,
I did hear some lacquies speaking of sad newes come to Court, saying,
that hardly anybody in the Court but do look as if he cried, and would
not go into the house for fear of being seen, but slunk out and got
into a coach, and to The. Turner’s to Sir W. Turner’s, where I met Roger
Pepys, newly come out of the country. He and I talked aside a little,
he offering a match for Pall, one Barnes, of whom we shall talk more the
next time. His father married a Pepys; in discourse, he told me further
that his grandfather, my great grandfather, had L800 per annum, in
Queen Elizabeth’s time, in the very town of Cottenham; and that we did
certainly come out of Scotland with the Abbot of Crowland. More talk I
had, and shall have more with him, but my mind is so sad and head full
of this ill news that I cannot now set it down. A short visit here, my
wife coming to me, and took leave of The., and so home, where all our
hearts do now ake; for the newes is true, that the Dutch have broke the
chaine and burned our ships, and particularly “The Royal Charles,”

     [Vandervelde’s drawings of the conflagration of the English fleet,
     made by him on the spot, are in the British Museum.--B.]

other particulars I know not, but most sad to be sure. And, the truth
is, I do fear so much that the whole kingdom is undone, that I do this
night resolve to study with my father and wife what to do with the
little that I have in money by me, for I give [up] all the rest that I
have in the King’s hands, for Tangier, for lost. So God help us! and God
knows what disorders we may fall into, and whether any violence on this
office, or perhaps some severity on our persons, as being reckoned by
the silly people, or perhaps may, by policy of State, be thought fit
to be condemned by the King and Duke of York, and so put to trouble;
though, God knows! I have, in my own person, done my full duty, I am
sure. So having with much ado finished my business at the office, I home
to consider with my father and wife of things, and then to supper and
to bed with a heavy heart. The manner of my advising this night with my
father was, I took him and my wife up to her chamber, and shut the door;
and there told them the sad state of the times how we are like to be
all undone; that I do fear some violence will be offered to this
office, where all I have in the world is; and resolved upon sending it
away--sometimes into the country--sometimes my father to lie in town,
and have the gold with him at Sarah Giles’s, and with that resolution
went to bed full of fear and fright, hardly slept all night.