21st. Up, and my wife and I fell out about the pair of cuffs, which she
hath a mind to have to go to see the ladies dancing to-morrow at Betty
Turner’s school; and do vex me so that I am resolved to deny them
her. However, by-and-by a way was found that she had them, and I well
satisfied, being unwilling to let our difference grow higher upon so
small an occasion and frowardness of mine. Then to the office, my Lord
Bruncker and I all the morning answering petitions, which now by a new
Council’s order we are commanded to set a day in a week apart for,
and we resolve to do it by turn, my Lord and I one week and two others
another. At noon home to dinner, and then my wife and I mighty pleasant
abroad, she to the New Exchange and I to the Commissioners of the
Treasury, who do sit very close, and are bringing the King’s charges as
low as they can; but Sir W. Coventry did here again tell me that he is
very serious in what he said to Sir W. Pen and me yesterday about our
lending of money to the King; and says that people do talk that we had
had the King’s ships at his cost to take prizes, and that we ought
to lend the King money more than other people. I did tell him I will
consider it, and so parted; and do find I cannot avoid it. So to
Westminster Hall and there staid a while, and thence to Mrs. Martin’s,
and there did take a little pleasure both with her and her sister. Here
sat and talked, and it is a strange thing to see the impudence of the
woman, that desires by all means to have her mari come home, only that
she might beat liberty to have me para toker her, which is a thing I do
not so much desire. Thence by coach, took up my wife, and home and out
to Mile End, and there drank, and so home, and after some little reading
in my chamber, to supper and to bed. This day I sent my cozen Roger a
tierce of claret, which I give him. This morning come two of Captain
Cooke’s boys, whose voices are broke, and are gone from the Chapel, but
have extraordinary skill; and they and my boy, with his broken voice,
did sing three parts; their names were Blaewl and Loggings; but,
notwithstanding their skill, yet to hear them sing with their broken
voices, which they could not command to keep in tune, would make a man
mad--so bad it was.