8th (Lord’s day). All the morning at my chamber doing something towards
the settling of my papers and accounts, which have been out of order a
great while. At noon to dinner, where W. How with us, and after dinner,
he being gone, I to my chamber again till almost night, and then took
boat, the tide serving, and so to White Hall, where I saw the Duchesse
of York, in a fine dress of second mourning for her mother, being black,
edged with ermine, go to make her first visit to the Queene since the
Duke of York was sick; and by and by, she being returned, the Queene
come and visited her. But it was pretty to observe that Sir W. Coventry
and I, walking an hour and more together in the Matted Gallery, he
observed, and so did I, how the Duchesse, as soon as she spied him,
turned her head a one side. Here he and I walked thus long, which we
have not done a great while before. Our discourse was upon everything:
the unhappiness of having our matters examined by people that understand
them not; that it was better for us in the Navy to have men that do
understand the whole, and that are not passionate; that we that have
taken the most pains are called upon to answer for all crimes, while
those that, like Sir W. Batten and Sir J. Minnes, did sit and do
nothing, do lie still without any trouble; that, if it were to serve
the King and kingdom again in a war, neither of us could do more,
though upon this experience we might do better than we did; that the
commanders, the gentlemen that could never be brought to order, but
undid all, are now the men that find fault and abuse others; that it
had been much better for the King to have given Sir J. Minnes and Sir
W. Batten L1000 a-year to have sat still, than to have had them in his
business this war: that the serving a Prince that minds not his business
is most unhappy for them that serve him well, and an unhappiness so
great that he declares he will never have more to do with a war,
under him. That he hath papers which do flatly contradict the Duke of
Albemarle’s Narrative; and that he hath been with the Duke of Albemarle
and shewed him them, to prevent his falling into another like fault:
that the Duke of Albemarle seems to be able to answer them; but he
thinks that the Duke of Albemarle and the Prince are contented to let
their Narratives sleep, they being not only contradictory in some things
(as he observed about the business of the Duke of Albemarle’s being to
follow the Prince upon dividing the fleete, in case the enemy come out),
but neither of them to be maintained in others. That the business the
other night of my Lord Anglesey at the Council was happily got over
for my Lord, by his dexterous silencing it, and the rest, not urging it
further; forasmuch as, had the Duke of Buckingham come in time enough,
and had got it by the end, he, would have toused him in it; Sir W.
Coventry telling me that my Lord Anglesey did, with such impudence,
maintain the quarrel against the Commons and some of the Lords, in the
business of my Lord Clarendon, that he believes there are enough would
be glad but of this occasion to be revenged of him. He tells me that
he hears some of the Thomsons are like to be of the Commission for the
Accounts, and Wildman, which he much wonders at, as having been a false
fellow to every body, and in prison most of the time since the King’s
coming in. But he do tell me that the House is in such a condition that
nobody can tell what to make of them, and, he thinks, they were never
in before; that every body leads, and nobody follows; and that he do
now think that, since a great many are defeated in their expectation
of being of the Commission, now they would put it into such hands as it
shall get no credit from: for, if they do look to the bottom and see
the King’s case, they think they are then bound to give the King money;
whereas, they would be excused from that, and therefore endeavour to
make this business of the Accounts to signify little. I spoke with him
about my Lord Sandwich’s business, in which he is very friendly, and do
say that the unhappy business of the prizes is it that hath brought
all this trouble upon him, and the only thing that made any thing else
mentioned, and it is true. So having discoursed with him, I spent some
time with Sir Stephen Fox about the business of our adjusting the new
method of the Excise between the Guards household and Tangier, the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury being now resolved to bring all their
management into a course of payment by orders, and not by tallies, and
I am glad of it, and so by water home late, and very dark, and when come
home there I got my wife to read, and then come Captain Cocke to me; and
there he tells me, to my great satisfaction, that Sir Robert Brookes did
dine with him today; and that he told him, speaking of me, that he would
make me the darling of the House of Commons, so much he is satisfied
concerning me. And this Cocke did tell me that I might give him thanks
for it; and I do think it may do me good, for he do happen to be held a
considerable person, of a young man, both for sobriety and ability. Then
to discourse of business of his own about some hemp of his that is come
home to receive it into the King’s stores, and then parted, and by and
by my wife and I to supper, she not being well, her flux being great
upon her, and so to bed.