6th. Up, and to the office, where some of us sat busy all the morning.
At noon home to dinner, whither Creed come to dine with us and brings
the first word I hear of the news of a peace, the King having letters
come to him this noon signifying that it is concluded on, and that Mr.
Coventry is upon his way coming over for the King’s satisfaction. The
news was so good and sudden that I went with great joy to [Sir] W.
Batten and then to [Sir] W. Pen to tell it them, and so home to
dinner, mighty merry, and light at my heart only on this ground, that a
continuing of the war must undo us, and so though peace may do the like
if we do not make good use of it to reform ourselves and get up money,
yet there is an opportunity for us to save ourselves. At least, for my
own particular, we shall continue well till I can get my money into
my hands, and then I will shift for myself. After dinner away, leaving
Creed there, by coach to Westminster, where to the Swan and drank, and
then to the Hall, and there talked a little with great joy of the peace,
and then to Mrs. Martin’s, where I met with the good news que elle ne
est con child, the fear of which she did give me the other day, had
troubled me much. My joy in this made me send for wine, and thither
come her sister and Mrs. Cragg, and I staid a good while there. But here
happened the best instance of a woman’s falseness in the world, that her
sister Doll, who went for a bottle of wine, did come home all blubbering
and swearing against one Captain Vandener, a Dutchman of the Rhenish
Wine House, that pulled her into a stable by the Dog tavern, and there
did tumble her and toss her, calling him all the rogues and toads in the
world, when she knows that elle hath suffered me to do any thing with
her a hundred times. Thence with joyful heart to White Hall to ask Mr.
Williamson the news, who told me that Mr. Coventry is coming over with
a project of a peace; which, if the States agree to, and our King, when
their Ministers on both sides have shewed it them, we shall agree, and
that is all: but the King, I hear, do give it out plain that the peace
is concluded. Thence by coach home, and there wrote a few letters, and
then to consult with my wife about going to Epsum to-morrow, sometimes
designing to go and then again not; and at last it grew late and I
bethought myself of business to employ me at home tomorrow, and so I
did not go. This afternoon I met with Mr. Rolt, who tells me that he is
going Cornett under Collonel Ingoldsby, being his old acquaintance,
and Ingoldsby hath a troop now from under the King, and I think it is a
handsome way for him, but it was an ominous thing, methought, just as he
was bidding me his last adieu, his nose fell a-bleeding, which ran in my
mind a pretty while after. This afternoon Sir Alexander Frazier, who
was of council for Sir J. Minnes, and had given him over for a dead man,
said to me at White Hall:--“What,” says he, “Sir J. Minnes is dead.” I
told him, “No! but that there is hopes of his life.” Methought he looked
very sillily after it, and went his way. Late home to supper, a
little troubled at my not going to Epsum to-morrow, as I had resolved,
especially having the Duke of York and [Sir] W. Coventry out of town,
but it was my own fault and at last my judgment to stay, and so to
supper and to bed. This day, with great satisfaction, I hear that my
Lady Jemimah is brought to bed, at Hinchingbroke, of a boy.