September 1st (Lord’s day). Up, and betimes by water from the Tower,
and called at the Old Swan for a glass of strong water, and sent word to
have little Michell and his wife come and dine with us to-day; and so,
taking in a gentleman and his lady that wanted a boat, I to Westminster.
Setting them on shore at Charing Cross, I to Mrs. Martin’s, where I
had two pair of cuffs which I bespoke, and there did sit and talk with
her.... and here I did see her little girle my goddaughter, which will
be pretty, and there having staid a little I away to Creed’s chamber,
and when he was ready away to White Hall, where I met with several
people and had my fill of talk. Our new Lord-keeper, Bridgeman, did this
day, the first time, attend the King to chapel with his Seal. Sir H.
Cholmly tells me there are hopes that the women will also have a rout,
and particularly that my Lady Castlemayne is coming to a composition
with the King to be gone; but how true this is, I know not. Blancfort is
made Privy-purse to the Duke of York; the Attorney-general is made Chief
justice, in the room of my Lord Bridgeman; the Solicitor-general is made
Attorney-general; and Sir Edward Turner made Solicitor-general. It is
pretty to see how strange every body looks, nobody knowing whence this
arises; whether from my Lady Castlemayne, Bab. May, and their faction;
or from the Duke of York, notwithstanding his great appearance of
defence of the Chancellor; or from Sir William Coventry, and some few
with him. But greater changes are yet expected. So home and by water to
dinner, where comes Pelting and young Michell and his wife, whom I have
not seen a great while, poor girle, and then comes Mr. Howe, and all
dined with me very merry, and spent all the afternoon, Pelting, Howe,
and I, and my boy, singing of Lock’s response to the Ten Commandments,
which he hath set very finely, and was a good while since sung before
the King, and spoiled in the performance, which occasioned his printing
them for his vindication, and are excellent good. They parted, in the
evening my wife and I to walk in the garden and there scolded a little,
I being doubtful that she had received a couple of fine pinners (one of
point de Gesne), which I feared she hath from some [one] or other of a
present; but, on the contrary, I find she hath bought them for me to pay
for them, without my knowledge. This do displease me much; but yet do so
much please me better than if she had received them the other way, that
I was not much angry, but fell to other discourse, and so to my chamber,
and got her to read to me for saving of my eyes, and then, having got a
great cold, I know not how, I to bed and lay ill at ease all the night.