16th. Up, and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and, among
other things, comes in Mr. Carcasse, and after many arguings against
it, did offer security as was desired, but who should this be but Mr.
Powell, that is one other of my Lord Bruncker’s clerks; and I hope
good use will be made of it. But then he began to fall foul upon the
injustice of the Board, which when I heard I threatened him with being
laid by the heels, which my Lord Bruncker took up as a thing that I
could not do upon the occasion he had given, but yet did own that it was
ill said of him. I made not many words of it, but have let him see that
I can say what I will without fear of him, and so we broke off, leaving
the bond to be drawn by me, which I will do in the best manner I can. At
noon, this being Holy Thursday, that is, Ascension Day, when the boys go
on procession round the parish, we were to go to the Three Tuns’ Tavern,
to dine with the rest of the parish; where all the parish almost was,
Sir Andrew Rickard and others; and of our house, J. Minnes, W. Batten,
W. Pen, and myself; and Mr. Mills did sit uppermost at the table. Here
we were informed that the report of our Embassadors being ill received
in their way to Bredah is not true, but that they are received with very
great civility, which I am glad to hear. But that that did vex me was
that among all us there should come in Mr. Carcasse to be a guest for
his money (5s. a piece) as well as any of us. This did vex me, and I
would have gone, and did go to my house, thinking to dine at home, but
I was called away from them, and so we sat down, and to dinner. Among
other things Sir John Fredericke and Sir R. Ford did talk of Paul’s
School, which, they tell me, must be taken away; and then I fear it will
be long before another place, as they say is promised, is found; but
they do say that the honour of their company is concerned in the doing
of it, and that it is a thing that they are obliged to do. Thence home,
and to my office, where busy; anon at 7 at night I and my wife and Sir
W. Pen in his coach to Unthanke’s, my wife’s tailor, for her to speak
one word, and then we to my Lord Treasurer’s, where I find the porter
crying, and suspected it was that my Lord is dead; and, poor Lord! we
did find that he was dead just now; and the crying of the fellow did so
trouble me, that considering I was not likely to trouble him any more,
nor have occasion to give any more anything, I did give him 3s.; but it
may be, poor man, he hath lost a considerable hope by the death of his
Lord, whose house will be no more frequented as before, and perhaps I
may never come thither again about any business. There is a good man
gone: and I pray God that the Treasury may not be worse managed by
the hand or hands it shall now be put into; though, for certain, the
slowness, though he was of great integrity, of this man, and remissness,
have gone as far to undo the nation, as anything else that hath
happened; and yet, if I knew all the difficulties that he hath lain
under, and his instrument Sir Philip Warwicke, I might be brought to
another mind. Thence we to Islington, to the Old House, and there eat
and drank, and then it being late and a pleasant evening, we home, and
there to my chamber, and to bed. It is remarkable that this afternoon
Mr. Moore come to me, and there, among other things, did tell me how Mr.
Moyer, the merchant, having procured an order from the King and Duke
of York and Council, with the consent of my Lord Chancellor, and by
assistance of Lord Arlington, for the releasing out of prison his
brother, Samuel Moyer, who was a great man in the late times in
Haberdashers’-hall, and was engaged under hand and seal to give the man
that obtained it so much in behalf of my Lord Chancellor; but it seems
my Lady Duchess of Albemarle had before undertaken it for so much money,
but hath not done it. The Duke of Albemarle did the next day send for
this Moyer, to tell him, that notwithstanding this order of the King and
Council’s being passed for release of his brother, yet, if he did not
consider the pains of some friends of his, he would stop that order.
This Moyer being an honest, bold man, told him that he was engaged to
the hand that had done the thing to give him a reward; and more he would
not give, nor could own any kindness done by his Grace’s interest; and
so parted. The next day Sir Edward Savage did take the said Moyer in tax
about it, giving ill words of this Moyer and his brother; which he
not being able to bear, told him he would give to the person that had
engaged him what he promised, and not any thing to any body else; and
that both he and his brother were as honest men as himself, or any man
else; and so sent him going, and bid him do his worst. It is one of the
most extraordinary cases that ever I saw or understood; but it is true.
This day Mr. Sheply is come to town and to see me, and he tells me my
father is very well only for his pain, so that he is not able to stir;
but is in great pain. I would to God that he were in town that I might
have what help can be got for him, for it troubles me to have him live
in that condition of misery if I can help it.