30th. Up, and to White Hall, where at the Council Chamber I hear
Barker’s business is like to come to a hearing to-day, having failed
the last day. I therefore to Westminster to see what I could do in
my ‘Chequer business about Tangier, and finding nothing to be done,
returned, and in the Lobby staid till almost noon expecting to hear
Barker’s business, but it was not called, so I come away. Here I met
with Sir G. Downing, who tells me of Sir W. Pen’s offering to lend
L500; and I tell him of my L300, which he would have me to lend upon the
credit of the latter part of the Act; saying, that by that means my 10
per cent. will continue to me the longer. But I understand better, and
will do it upon the L380,000, which will come to be paid the sooner;
there being no delight in lending money now, to be paid by the King
two years hence. But here he and Sir William Doyly were attending the
Council as Commissioners for sick and wounded, and prisoners: and they
told me their business, which was to know how we shall do to release our
prisoners; for it seems the Dutch have got us to agree in the treaty, as
they fool us in anything, that the dyet of the prisoners on both sides
shall be paid for, before they be released; which they have done,
knowing ours to run high, they having more prisoners of ours than we
have of theirs; so that they are able and most ready to discharge the
debt of theirs, but we are neither able nor willing to do that for ours,
the debt of those in Zealand only, amounting to above L5000 for men
taken in the King’s own ships, besides others taken in merchantmen,
which expect, as is usual, that the King should redeem them; but I think
he will not, by what Sir G. Downing says. This our prisoners complain
of there; and say in their letters, which Sir G. Downing shewed me, that
they have made a good feat that they should be taken in the service of
the King, and the King not pay for their victuals while prisoners for
him. But so far they are from doing thus with their men, as we do to
discourage ours, that I find in the letters of some of our prisoners
there, which he shewed me, that they have with money got our men, that
they took, to work and carry their ships home for them; and they have
been well rewarded, and released when they come into Holland: which is
done like a noble, brave, and wise people. Having staid out my time that
I thought fit for me to return home, I home and there took coach and
with my wife to Walthamstow; to Sir W. Pen’s, by invitation, the first
time I have been there, and there find him and all their guests (of
our office only) at dinner, which was a very bad dinner, and everything
suitable, that I never knew people in my life that make their flutter,
that do things so meanly. I was sick to see it, but was merry at some
ridiculous humours of my Lady Batten, who, as being an ill-bred woman,
would take exceptions at anything any body said, and I made good sport
at it. After dinner into the garden and wilderness, which is like the
rest of the house, nothing in order, nor looked after. By and by comes
newes that my Lady Viner was come to see Mrs. Lowther, which I was glad
of, and all the pleasure I had here was to see her, which I did, and
saluted her, and find she is pretty, though not so eminently so as
people talked of her, and of very pretty carriage and discourse. I sat
with them and her an hour talking and pleasant, and then slunk away
alone without taking leave, leaving my wife there to come home with
them, and I to Bartholomew fayre, to walk up and down; and there,
among other things, find my Lady Castlemayne at a puppet-play, “Patient
Grizill,”

     [The well-known story, first told by Boccaccio, then by Petrarca,
     afterwards by Chaucer, and which has since become proverbial.  Tom
     Warton, writing about 1770, says, “I need not mention that it is to
     this day represented in England, on a stage of the lowest species,
     and of the highest antiquity: I mean at a puppet show” (“Hist. of
     English Poetry,” sect. xv.).--B.]

and the street full of people expecting her coming out. I confess I did
wonder at her courage to come abroad, thinking the people would abuse
her; but they, silly people! do not know her work she makes, and
therefore suffered her with great respect to take coach, and she away,
without any trouble at all, which I wondered at, I confess. I only
walked up and down, and, among others, saw Tom Pepys, the turner, who
hath a shop, and I think lives in the fair when the fair is not. I
only asked how he did as he stood in the street, and so up and down
sauntering till late and then home, and there discoursed with my wife of
our bad entertainment to-day, and so to bed. I met Captain Cocke to-day
at the Council Chamber and took him with me to Westminster, who tells
me that there is yet expectation that the Chancellor will lose the Seal,
and that he is sure that the King hath said it to him who told it him,
and he fears we shall be soon broke in pieces, and assures me that there
have been high words between the Duke of York and Sir W. Coventry, for
his being so high against the Chancellor; so as the Duke of York would
not sign some papers that he brought, saying that he could not endure
the sight of him: and that Sir W. Coventry answered, that what he did
was in obedience to the King’s commands; and that he did not think any
man fit to serve a Prince, that did not know how to retire and live a
country life. This is all I hear.