9th. Up, and betimes with Sir H. Cholmly upon some accounts of Tangier,
and then he and I to Westminster, to Mr. Burges, and then walked in the
Hall, and he and I talked, and he do really declare that he expects that
of necessity this kingdom will fall back again to a commonwealth, and
other wise men are of the same mind: this family doing all that silly
men can do, to make themselves unable to support their kingdom,
minding their lust and their pleasure, and making their government so
chargeable, that people do well remember better things were done, and
better managed, and with much less charge under a commonwealth than they
have been by this King, and do seem to resolve to wind up his businesses
and get money in his hand against the turn do come. After some talk I by
coach and there dined, and with us Mr. Batelier by chance coming in to
speak with me, and when I come home, and find Mr. Goodgroome, my wife’s
singing-master, there I did soundly rattle him for neglecting her so
much as he hath done--she not having learned three songs these three
months and more. After dinner my wife abroad with Mrs. Turner, and I to
the office, where busy all the afternoon, and in the evening by coach to
St. James’s, and there met Sir W. Coventry; and he and I walked in the
Park an hour. And then to his chamber, where he read to me the heads of
the late great dispute between him and the rest of the Commissioners
of the Treasury, and our new Treasurer of the Navy where they have
overthrown him the last Wednesday, in the great dispute touching his
having the payment of the Victualler, which is now settled by Council
that he is not to have it and, indeed, they have been most just, as well
as most severe and bold, in the doing this against a man of his quality;
but I perceive he do really make no difference between any man. He tells
me this day it is supposed the peace is ratified at Bredah, and all that
matter over. We did talk of many retrenchments of charge of the Navy
which he will put in practice, and every where else; though, he tells
me, he despairs of being able to do what ought to be done for the saving
of the kingdom, which I tell him, as indeed all the world is almost in
hopes of, upon the proceeding of these gentlemen for the regulating of
the Treasury, it being so late, and our poverty grown so great, that
they want where to set their feet, to begin to do any thing. He tells me
how weary he hath for this year and a half been of the war; and how in
the Duke of York’s bedchamber, at Christ Church, at Oxford, when the
Court was there, he did labour to persuade the Duke to fling off the
care of the Navy, and get it committed to other hands; which, if he had
done, would have been much to his honour, being just come home with so
much honour from sea as he did. I took notice of the sharp letter he
wrote, which he sent us to read yesterday, to Sir Edward Spragg, where
he is very plain about his leaving his charge of the ships at Gravesend,
when the enemy come last up, and several other things: a copy whereof
I have kept. But it is done like a most worthy man; and he says it is
good, now and then, to tell these gentlemen their duties, for they need
it. And it seems, as he tells me, all our Knights are fallen out one
with another, he, and Jenings, and Hollis, and (his words were) they
are disputing which is the coward among them; and yet men that take the
greatest liberty of censuring others! Here, with him, very late, till I
could hardly get a coach or link willing to go through the ruines; but I
do, but will not do it again, being, indeed, very dangerous. So home
and to supper, and bed, my head most full of an answer I have drawn
this noon to the Committee of the Council to whom Carcasses business is
referred to be examined again.