27th (Lord’s day). Up betimes, and leaving my wife to go by coach to
hear Mr. Frampton preach, which I had a mighty desire she should, I down
to the Old Swan, and there to Michell and staid while he and she dressed
themselves, and here had a ‘baiser’ or two of her, whom I love
mightily; and then took them in a sculler (being by some means or
other disappointed of my own boat) to White Hall, and so with them to
Westminster, Sir W. Coventry, Bruncker and I all the morning together
discoursing of the office business, and glad of the Controller’s
business being likely to be put into better order than formerly, and did
discourse of many good things, but especially of having something done
to bringing the Surveyor’s matters into order also. Thence I up to
the King’s closet, and there heard a good Anthem, and discoursed with
several people here about business, among others with Lord Bellasses,
and so from one to another after sermon till the King had almost dined,
and then home with Sir G. Carteret and dined with him, being mightily
ashamed of my not having seen my Lady Jemimah so long, and my wife not
at all yet since she come, but she shall soon do it. I thence to Sir
Philip Warwicke, by appointment, to meet Lord Bellasses, and up to his
chamber, but find him unwilling to discourse of business on Sundays; so
did not enlarge, but took leave, and went down and sat in a low room,
reading Erasmus “de scribendis epistolis,” a very good book, especially
one letter of advice to a courtier most true and good, which made me
once resolve to tear out the two leaves that it was writ in, but I
forebore it. By and by comes Lord Bellasses, and then he and I up again
to Sir P. Warwicke and had much discourse of our Tangier business, but
no hopes of getting any money. Thence I through the garden into the
Park, and there met with Roger Pepys, and he and I to walk in the Pell
Mell. I find by him that the House of Parliament continues full of ill
humours, and he seems to dislike those that are troublesome more than
needs, and do say how, in their late Poll Bill, which cost so much time,
the yeomanry, and indeed two-thirds of the nation, are left out to be
taxed, that there is not effectual provision enough made for collecting
of the money; and then, that after a man his goods are distrained
and sold, and the overplus returned, I am to have ten days to make my
complaints of being over-rated if there be cause, when my goods are
sold, and that is too late. These things they are resolved to look into
again, and mend them before they rise, which they expect at furthest
on Thursday next. Here we met with Mr. May, and he and we to talk of
several things, of building, and such like matters; and so walked to
White Hall, and there I skewed my cozen Roger the Duchesse of York
sitting in state, while her own mother stands by her; he had a desire,
and I shewed him my Lady Castlemayne, whom he approves to be very
handsome, and wonders that she cannot be as good within as she is fair
without. Her little black boy came by him; and, a dog being in his way,
the little boy called to the dog: “Pox of this dog!”--“Now,” says he,
blessing himself, “would I whip this child till the blood come, if it
were my child!” and I believe he would. But he do by no means like the
liberty of the Court, and did come with expectation of finding them
playing at cards to-night, though Sunday; for such stories he is told,
but how true I know not.

     [There is little reason to doubt that it was such as Evelyn
     describes it at a later time.  “I can never forget the inexpressible
     luxury and prophaneness, gaming, and all dissoluteness, and, as it
     were, total forgetfulness of God (it being Sunday evening) which
     this day se’nnight I was witness of; the King sitting and toying
     with his concubines, Portsmouth, Cleveland, Mazarin, &c.  A French
     boy singing love songs in that glorious gallery, whilst about twenty
     of the great courtiers and other dissolute persons were at basset
     round a large table, a bank of at least L2,000 in gold before them;
     upon which two gentlemen who were with me made reflexions with
     astonishment.  Six days after was all in the dust.”--Diary,
     February, 1685.--B.]

After walking up and down the Court with him, it being now dark and past
six at night, I walked to the Swan in the Palace yard and there with
much ado did get a waterman, and so I sent for the Michells, and they
come, and their father Howlett and his wife with them, and there we
drank, and so into the boat, poor Betty’s head aching. We home by water,
a fine moonshine and warm night, it having been also a very summer’s
day for warmth. I did get her hand to me under my cloak.... So there
we parted at their house, and he walked almost home with me, and then
I home and to supper, and to read a little and to bed. My wife tells
me Mr. Frampton is gone to sea, and so she lost her labour to-day in
thinking to hear him preach, which I am sorry for.