12th. Up, and eat our breakfast, and set out about nine o’clock, and so
to Barnett, where we staid and baited, the weather very good all day and
yesterday, and by five o’clock got home, where I find all well; and did
bring my gold, to my heart’s content, very safe home, having not this
day carried it in a basket, but in our hands: the girl took care of one,
and my wife another bag, and I the rest, I being afraid of the bottom
of the coach, lest it should break, and therefore was at more ease in my
mind than I was yesterday. At home we find that Sir W. Batten’s burial
was to-day carried from hence, with a hundred or two of coaches, to
Walthamstow, and there buried. Here I hear by Mr. Pierce the surgeon;
and then by Mr. Lewes, and also by Mr. Hater, that the Parliament hath
met on Thursday last, and adjourned to Monday next. The King did make
them a very kind speech, promising them to leave all to them to do,
and call to account what and whom they pleased; and declared by my Lord
Keeper how many, thirty-six, actes he had done since he saw them; among
others, disbanding the army, and putting all Papists out of employment,
and displacing persons that had managed their business ill, that the
Parliament is mightily pleased with the King’s speech, and voted giving
him thanks for what he said and hath done; and, among things, would by
name thank him for displacing my Lord Chancellor, for which a great many
did speak in the House, but it was opposed by some, and particularly
Harry Coventry, who got that it should be put to a Committee to consider
what particulars to mention in their thanks to the King, saying that
it was too soon to give thanks for the displacing of a man, before they
knew or had examined what was the cause of his displacing. And so it
rested; but this do shew that they are and will be very high; and Mr.
Pierce do tell me that he fears, and do hear, that it hath been said
among them, that they will move for the calling my Lord Sandwich home,
to bring him to account; which do trouble me mightily; but I trust it
will not be so. Anon comes home Sir W. Pen from the burial, and he and
I to walk in the garden, where he did confirm the most of this news, and
so to talk of our particular concernments, and among the rest he says
that Lady Batten and her children-in-law are all broke in pieces, and
that there is but L800 found in the world, of money; and is in great
doubt what we shall do towards the doing ourselves right with them,
about the prize-money. This troubles me, but we will fall to work upon
that next week close. Then he tells me he did deliver my petition into
the hands of Sir W. Coventry, who did take it with great kindness and
promised to present it to the Duke of York, and that himself has since
seen the Duke of York, but it was in haste, and thinks the Duke of York
did tell him that the thing was done, but he is confident that it either
is or will be done. This do please me mightily. So after a little talk
more I away home to supper with John Bowles and brother and wife (who, I
perceive, is already a little jealous of my being fond of Willet, but
I will avoid giving her any cause to continue in that mind, as much as
possible), and before that did go with Sir W. Pen to my Lady Batten,
whom I had not seen since she was a widow, which she took unkindly, but
I did excuse it; and the house being full of company, and of several
factions, she against the children, and they against one another and
her, I away, and home to supper, and after supper to bed.