1667.  In that year (the very year in which Evelyn was giving this
     account to Pepys), the Duchy of Vaujour and two baronies were
     created in favour of La Valliere, and her daughter, who, in the deed
     of creation, was legitimatized, and styled princess.--B.]

any thing to bestow on others, and gives a little subsistence, but no
more, to his bastards. He told me the whole story of Mrs. Stewart’s
going away from Court, he knowing her well; and believes her, up to her
leaving the Court, to be as virtuous as any woman in the world: and told
me, from a Lord that she told it to but yesterday, with her own mouth,
and a sober man, that when the Duke of Richmond did make love to her,
she did ask the King, and he did the like also; and that the King did
not deny it, and [she] told this Lord that she was come to that pass as
to resolve to have married any gentleman of L1500 a-year that would
have had her in honour; for it was come to that pass, that she could not
longer continue at Court without prostituting herself to the King,

     [Even at a much later time Mrs. Godolphin well resolved “not to talk
     foolishly to men, more especially THE KING,”--“be sure never to
     talk to THE KING” (“Life,” by Evelyn).  These expressions speak
     volumes as to Charles’s character.--B.]

whom she had so long kept off, though he had liberty more than any other
had, or he ought to have, as to dalliance.

     [Evelyn evidently believed the Duchess of Richmond to be innocent;
     and his testimony, coupled with her own declaration, ought to weigh
     down all the scandal which Pepys reports from other sources.--B.]

She told this Lord that she had reflected upon the occasion she had
given the world to think her a bad woman, and that she had no way but
to marry and leave the Court, rather in this way of discontent than
otherwise, that the world might see that she sought not any thing but
her honour; and that she will never come to live at Court more than when
she comes to town to come to kiss the Queene her Mistress’s hand: and
hopes, though she hath little reason to hope, she can please her Lord so
as to reclaim him, that they may yet live comfortably in the country on
his estate. She told this Lord that all the jewells she ever had given
her at Court, or any other presents, more than the King’s allowance of
L700 per annum out of the Privypurse for her clothes, were, at her first
coming the King did give her a necklace of pearl of about L1100 and
afterwards, about seven months since, when the King had hopes to have
obtained some courtesy of her, the King did give her some jewells, I
have forgot what, and I think a pair of pendants. The Duke of York,
being once her Valentine, did give her a jewell of about L800; and my
Lord Mandeville, her Valentine this year, a ring of about L300; and the
King of France would have had her mother, who, he says, is one of the
most cunning women in the world, to have let her stay in France, saying
that he loved her not as a mistress, but as one that he could marry as
well as any lady in France; and that, if she might stay, for the honour
of his Court he would take care she should not repent. But her mother,
by command of the Queen-mother, thought rather to bring her into
England; and the King of France did give her a jewell: so that Mr.
Evelyn believes she may be worth in jewells about L6000, and that that
is all that she hath in the world: and a worthy woman; and in this hath
done as great an act of honour as ever was done by woman. That now the
Countesse Castlemayne do carry all before her: and among other arguments
to prove Mrs. Stewart to have been honest to the last, he says that
the King’s keeping in still with my Lady Castlemayne do show it; for he
never was known to keep two mistresses in his life, and would never have
kept to her had he prevailed any thing with Mrs. Stewart. She is gone
yesterday with her Lord to Cobham. He did tell me of the ridiculous
humour of our King and Knights of the Garter the other day, who, whereas
heretofore their robes were only to be worn during their ceremonies
and service, these, as proud of their coats, did wear them all day till
night, and then rode into the Parke with them on. Nay, and he tells me
he did see my Lord Oxford and the Duke of Monmouth in a hackney-coach
with two footmen in the Parke, with their robes on; which is a most
scandalous thing, so as all gravity may be said to be lost among us. By
and by we discoursed of Sir Thomas Clifford, whom I took for a very rich
and learned man, and of the great family of that name. He tells me he is
only a man of about seven-score pounds a-year, of little learning more
than the law of a justice of peace, which he knows well: a parson’s son,
got to be burgess in a little borough in the West, and here fell into
the acquaintance of my Lord Arlington, whose creature he is, and never
from him; a man of virtue, and comely, and good parts enough; and hath
come into his place with a great grace, though with a great skip over
the heads of a great many, as Chichly and Duncum, and some Lords that
did expect it. By the way, he tells me, that of all the great men of
England there is none that endeavours more to raise those that he takes
into favour than my Lord Arlington; and that, on that score, he is much
more to be made one’s patron than my Lord Chancellor, who never did,
nor never will do, any thing, but for money! After having this long
discourse we parted, about one of the clock, and so away by water home,
calling upon Michell, whose wife and girle are pretty well, and I home
to dinner, and after dinner with Sir W. Batten to White Hall, there to
attend the Duke of York before council, where we all met at his closet
and did the little business we had, and here he did tell us how the King
of France is intent upon his design against Flanders, and hath drawn up
a remonstrance of the cause of the war, and appointed the 20th of the
next month for his rendezvous, and himself to prepare for the campaign
the 30th, so that this, we are in hopes, will keep him in employment.
Turenne is to be his general. Here was Carcasses business unexpectedly
moved by him, but what was done therein appears in my account of his
case in writing by itself. Certain newes of the Dutch being abroad on
our coast with twenty-four great ships. This done Sir W. Batten and I
back again to London, and in the way met my Lady Newcastle going with
her coaches and footmen all in velvet: herself, whom I never saw before,
as I have heard her often described, for all the town-talk is now-a-days
of her extravagancies, with her velvetcap, her hair about her ears; many
black patches, because of pimples about her mouth; naked-necked, without
any thing about it, and a black just-au-corps. She seemed to me a
very comely woman: but I hope to see more of her on Mayday. My mind
is mightily of late upon a coach. At home, to the office, where late
spending all the evening upon entering in long hand our late passages
with Carcasse for memory sake, and so home in great pain in my back by
the uneasiness of Sir W. Batten’s coach driving hard this afternoon over
the stones to prevent coming too late. So at night to supper in great
pain, and to bed, where lay in great pain, not able to turn myself all
night.