23rd. Up before day, and by coach to Sir W. Coventry’s, and with him to
White Hall, and there walked a great while with him in the garden
till the Commissioners of the Treasury met, and there talked over many
businesses, and particularly he tells me that by my desire he hath moved
the Duke of York that Sir J. Minnes might be removed from the Navy, at
least the Controller’s place, and his business put on my Lord Brouncker
and Sir W. Pen; that the Committee for Accounts are good sober men, and
such as he thinks we shall have fair play from; that he hopes that the
kingdom will escape ruin in general, notwithstanding all our fears, and
yet I find he do seem not very confident in it. So to the Commissioners
of the Treasury, and there I had a dispute before them with Sir Stephen
Fox about our orders for money, who is very angry, but I value it not.
But, Lord! to see with what folly my Lord Albemarle do speak in this
business would make a man wonder at the good fortune of such a fool.
Thence meeting there with Creed, he and I to the Exchange, and there I
saw Carr stand in the pillory for the business of my Lord Gerard, which
is supposed will make a hot business in the House of Commons, when
they shall come to sit again, the Lords having ordered this with great
injustice, as all people think, his only fault being the printing his
petition before, by accident, his petition be read in the House. Here
walked up and down the Exchange with Creed, and then home to dinner, and
there hear by Creed that the Bishops of Winchester and of Rochester, and
the Dean of the Chapel, and some other great prelates, are suspended:
and a cloud upon the Archbishop ever since the late business in the
House of Lords; and I believe it will be a heavy blow to the Clergy.
This noon I bought a sermon of Dr. Floyd’s, which Creed read a great
part of to me and Mr. Hollier, who dined with me, but as well writ and
as good, against the Church of Rome, as ever I read; but, Lord! how
Hollier, poor man, was taken with it. They gone I to the office, and
there very late with Mr. Willson and my people about the making of a new
contract for the victualler, which do and will require a great deal of
pains of me, and so to supper and to bed, my wife being pretty well all
this day by reason of her imposthume being broke in her cheek into her
mouth. This day, at the ‘Change, Creed shewed me Mr. Coleman, of whom
my wife hath so good an opinion, and says that he is as very a rogue for
women as any in the world; which did disquiet me, like a fool, and run
in my mind a great while.