3rd. Up, and by coach to St. James’s, and with Sir W. Coventry a great
while talking about several businesses, but especially about accounts,
and how backward our Treasurer is in giving them satisfaction, and the
truth is I do doubt he cannot do better, but it is strange to say that
being conscious of our doing little at this day, nor for some time past
in our office for want of money, I do hang my head to him, and cannot
be so free with him as I used to be, nor can be free with him, though of
all men, I think, I have the least cause to be so, having taken so much
more pains, while I could do anything, than the rest of my fellows.
Parted with him, and so going through the Park met Mr. Mills, our
parson, whom I went back with to bring him to [Sir] W. Coventry, to
give him the form of a qualification for the Duke of York to sign to,
to enable him to have two livings: which was a service I did, but much
against my will, for a lazy, fat priest. Thence to Westminster Hall, and
there walked a turn or two with Sir William Doyly, who did lay a wager
with me, the Treasurership would be in one hand, notwithstanding this
present Commission, before Christmas: on which we did lay a poll of
ling, a brace of carps, and a pottle of wine; and Sir W. Pen and Mr.
Scowen to be at the eating of them. Thence down by water to Deptford, it
being Trinity Monday, when the Master is chosen, and there, finding them
all at church, and thinking they dined, as usual, at Stepny, I turned
back, having a good book in my hand, the Life of Cardinal Wolsey, wrote
by his own servant, and to Ratcliffe; and so walked to Stepny, and
spent, my time in the churchyard, looking over the gravestones,
expecting when the company would come by. Finding no company stirring,
I sent to the house to see; and, it seems, they dine not there, but
at Deptford: so I back again to Deptford, and there find them just sat
down. And so I down with them; and we had a good dinner of plain meat,
and good company at our table: among others, my good Mr. Evelyn, with
whom, after dinner, I stepped aside, and talked upon the present posture
of our affairs; which is, that the Dutch are known to be abroad with
eighty sail of ships of war, and twenty fire-ships; and the French come
into the Channell with twenty sail of men-of-war, and five fireships,
while we have not a ship at sea to do them any hurt with; but are
calling in all we can, while our Embassadors are treating at Bredah; and
the Dutch look upon them as come to beg peace, and use them accordingly;
and all this through the negligence of our Prince, who hath power, if he
would, to master all these with the money and men that he hath had the
command of, and may now have, if he would mind his business. But,
for aught we see, the Kingdom is likely to be lost, as well as the
reputation of it is, for ever; notwithstanding so much reputation got
and preserved by a rebel that went before him. This discourse of ours
ended with sorrowful reflections upon our condition, and so broke up,
and Creed and I got out of the room, and away by water to White Hall,
and there he and I waited in the Treasury-chamber an hour or two, where
we saw the Country Receivers and Accountants for money come to attend;
and one of them, a brisk young fellow, with his hat cocked like a fool
behind, as the present fashion among the blades is, committed to the
Serjeant. By and by, I, upon desire, was called in, and delivered in my
report of my Accounts. Present, Lord Ashly, Clifford, and Duncomb, who,
being busy, did not read it; but committed it to Sir George Downing, and
so I was dismissed; but, Lord! to see how Duncomb do take upon him is
an eyesore, though I think he deserves great honour, but only the
suddenness of his rise, and his pride. But I do like the way of these
lords, that they admit nobody to use many words, nor do they spend many
words themselves, but in great state do hear what they see necessary,
and say little themselves, but bid withdraw. Thence Creed and I by
water up to Fox Hall, and over against it stopped, thinking to see some
Cock-fighting; but it was just being done, and, therefore, back again to
the other side, and to Spring Garden, and there eat and drank a little,
and then to walk up and down the garden, reflecting upon the bad
management of things now, compared with what it was in the late
rebellious times, when men, some for fear, and some for religion, minded
their business, which none now do, by being void of both. Much talk of
this and, other kinds, very pleasant, and so when it was almost night
we home, setting him in at White Hall, and I to the Old Swan, and thence
home, where to supper, and then to read a little, and so to bed.