14th. Up, and to the office; where Mr. Fryer comes and tells me that
there are several Frenchmen and Flemish ships in the River, with passes
from the Duke of York for carrying of prisoners, that ought to be parted
from the rest of the ships, and their powder taken, lest they do fire
themselves when the enemy comes, and so spoil us; which is good advice,
and I think I will give notice of it; and did so. But it is pretty odd
to see how every body, even at this high time of danger, puts business
off of their own hands! He says that he told this to the Lieutenant of
the Tower, to whom I, for the same reason, was directing him to go; and
the Lieutenant of the Tower bade him come to us, for he had nothing to
do with it; and yesterday comes Captain Crew, of one of the fireships,
and told me that the officers of the Ordnance would deliver his gunner’s
materials, but not compound them,

     [Meaning, apparently, that the Ordnance would deliver the charcoal,
     sulphur, and saltpetre separately, but not mix them as gunpowder.]

     [The want of ammunition when the Dutch burnt the fleet, and the
     revenge of the deserter sailors, are well described by Marvell

          “Our Seamen, whom no danger’s shape could fright,
          Unpaid, refuse to mount their ships, for spite
          Or to their fellows swim, on board the Dutch,
          Who show the tempting metal in their clutch.]

but that we must do it; whereupon I was forced to write to them about
it; and one that like a great many come to me this morning by and by
comes--Mr. Wilson, and by direction of his, a man of Mr. Gawden’s; who
come from Chatham last night, and saw the three ships burnt, they lying
all dry, and boats going from the men-of-war and fire them. But that,
that he tells me of worst consequence is, that he himself, I think he
said, did hear many Englishmen on board the Dutch ships speaking to one
another in English; and that they did cry and say, “We did heretofore
fight for tickets; now we fight for dollars!” and did ask how such and
such a one did, and would commend themselves to them: which is a sad
consideration. And Mr. Lewes, who was present at this fellow’s discourse
to me, did tell me, that he is told that when they took “The Royall
Charles,” they said that they had their tickets signed, and showed
some, and that now they come to have them paid, and would have them paid
before they parted. And several seamen come this morning to me, to tell
me that, if I would get their tickets paid, they would go and do all
they could against the Dutch; but otherwise they would not venture being
killed, and lose all they have already fought for: so that I was forced
to try what I could do to get them paid. This man tells me that the
ships burnt last night did lie above Upnor Castle, over against the
Docke; and the boats come from the ships of war and burnt them all which
is very sad. And masters of ships, that we are now taking up, do keep
from their ships all their stores, or as much as they can, so that we
can despatch them, having not time to appraise them nor secure their
payment; only some little money we have, which we are fain to pay the
men we have with, every night, or they will not work. And indeed the
hearts as well as affections of the seamen are turned away; and in
the open streets in Wapping, and up and down, the wives have cried
publickly, “This comes of your not paying our husbands; and now your
work is undone, or done by hands that understand it not.” And Sir W.
Batten told me that he was himself affronted with a woman, in language
of this kind, on Tower Hill publickly yesterday; and we are fain to bear
it, and to keep one at the office door to let no idle people in, for
fear of firing of the office and doing us mischief. The City is troubled
at their being put upon duty: summoned one hour, and discharged two
hours after; and then again summoned two hours after that; to their
great charge as well as trouble. And Pelling, the Potticary, tells me
the world says all over, that less charge than what the kingdom is put
to, of one kind or other, by this business, would have set out all
our great ships. It is said they did in open streets yesterday, at
Westminster, cry, “A Parliament! a Parliament!” and I do believe it will
cost blood to answer for these miscarriages. We do not hear that the
Dutch are come to Gravesend; which is a wonder. But a wonderful thing
it is that to this day we have not one word yet from Bruncker, or Peter
Pett, or J. Minnes, of any thing at Chatham. The people that come hither
to hear how things go, make me ashamed to be found unable to answer
them: for I am left alone here at the office; and the truth is, I am
glad my station is to be here, near my own home and out of danger, yet
in a place of doing the King good service. I have this morning good news
from Gibson; three letters from three several stages, that he was safe
last night as far as Royston, at between nine and ten at night. The
dismay that is upon us all, in the business of the kingdom and Navy at
this day, is not to be expressed otherwise than by the condition the
citizens were in when the City was on fire, nobody knowing which way
to turn themselves, while every thing concurred to greaten the fire; as
here the easterly gale and spring-tides for coming up both rivers, and
enabling them to break the chaine. D. Gawden did tell me yesterday, that
the day before at the Council they were ready to fall together by the
ears at the Council-table, arraigning one another of being guilty of
the counsel that brought us into this misery, by laying up all the great
ships. Mr. Hater tells me at noon that some rude people have been, as
he hears, at my Lord Chancellor’s, where they have cut down the trees
before his house and broke his windows; and a gibbet either set up
before or painted upon his gate, and these three words writ: “Three
sights to be seen; Dunkirke, Tangier, and a barren Queene.”

        [“Pride, Lust, Ambition, and the People’s Hate,
          The kingdom’s broker, ruin of the State,
          Dunkirk’s sad loss, divider of the fleet,
          Tangier’s compounder for a barren sheet
          This shrub of gentry, married to the crown,
          His daughter to the heir, is tumbled down.”

                    Poems on State Affairs, vol. i., p. 253.--B.]

It gives great matter of talk that it is said there is at this hour, in
the Exchequer, as much money as is ready to break down the floor. This
arises, I believe, from Sir G. Downing’s late talk of the greatness of
the sum lying there of people’s money, that they would not fetch away,
which he shewed me and a great many others. Most people that I speak
with are in doubt how we shall do to secure our seamen from running over
to the Dutch; which is a sad but very true consideration at this day.
At noon I am told that my Lord Duke of Albemarle is made Lord High
Constable; the meaning whereof at this time I know not, nor whether it,
be true or no. Dined, and Mr. Hater and W. Hewer with me; where they do
speak very sorrowfully of the posture of the times, and how people do
cry out in the streets of their being bought and sold; and both they,
and every body that come to me, do tell me that people make nothing of
talking treason in the streets openly: as, that we are bought and sold,
and governed by Papists, and that we are betrayed by people about the
King, and shall be delivered up to the French, and I know not what.
At dinner we discoursed of Tom of the Wood, a fellow that lives like a
hermit near Woolwich, who, as they say, and Mr. Bodham, they tell me,
affirms that he was by at the justice’s when some did accuse him there
for it, did foretell the burning of the City, and now says that a
greater desolation is at hand. Thence we read and laughed at Lilly’s
prophecies this month, in his Almanack this year! So to the office after
dinner; and thither comes Mr. Pierce, who tells me his condition, how he
cannot get his money, about L500, which, he says, is a very great part
of what he hath for his family and children, out of Viner’s hand: and
indeed it is to be feared that this will wholly undo the bankers. He
says he knows nothing of the late affronts to my Lord Chancellor’s
house, as is said, nor hears of the Duke of Albemarle’s being made High
Constable; but says that they are in great distraction at White Hall,
and that every where people do speak high against Sir W. Coventry: but
he agrees with me, that he is the best Minister of State the King hath,
and so from my heart I believe. At night come home Sir W. Batten and
W. Pen, who only can tell me that they have placed guns at Woolwich and
Deptford, and sunk some ships below Woolwich and Blackewall, and are
in hopes that they will stop the enemy’s coming up. But strange our
confusion! that among them that are sunk they have gone and sunk without
consideration “The Franakin,”’ one of the King’s ships, with stores to
a very considerable value, that hath been long loaden for supply of the
ships; and the new ship at Bristoll, and much wanted there; and nobody
will own that they directed it, but do lay it on Sir W. Rider. They
speak also of another ship, loaden to the value of L80,000, sunk with
the goods in her, or at least was mightily contended for by him, and a
foreign ship, that had the faith of the nation for her security: this
Sir R. Ford tells us: And it is too plain a truth, that both here and
at Chatham the ships that we have sunk have many, and the first of them,
been ships completely fitted for fire-ships at great charge. But most
strange the backwardness and disorder of all people, especially the
King’s people in pay, to do any work, Sir W. Pen tells me, all crying
out for money; and it was so at Chatham, that this night comes an order
from Sir W. Coventry to stop the pay of the wages of that Yard; the Duke
of Albemarle having related, that not above three of 1100 in pay there
did attend to do any work there. This evening having sent a messenger to
Chatham on purpose, we have received a dull letter from my Lord Bruncker
and Peter Pett, how matters have gone there this week; but not so much,
or so particularly, as we knew it by common talk before, and as true. I
doubt they will be found to have been but slow men in this business;
and they say the Duke of Albemarle did tell my Lord Bruncker to his face
that his discharging of the great ships there was the cause of all this;
and I am told that it is become common talk against my Lord Bruncker.
But in that he is to be justified, for he did it by verbal order from
Sir W. Coventry, and with good intent; and it was to good purpose,
whatever the success be, for the men would have but spent the King so
much the more in wages, and yet not attended on board to have done the
King any service; and as an evidence of that, just now, being the 15th
day in the morning that I am writing yesterday’s passages, one is with
me, Jacob Bryan, Purser of “The Princesse,” who confesses to me that he
hath about 180 men borne at this day in victuals and wages on that ship
lying at Chatham, being lately brought in thither; of which 180 there
was not above five appeared to do the King any service at this late
business. And this morning also, some of the Cambridge’s men come up
from Portsmouth, by order from Sir Fretcheville Hollis, who boasted to
us the other day that he had sent for 50, and would be hanged if 100 did
not come up that would do as much as twice the number of other men: I
say some of them, instead of being at work at Deptford, where they were
intended, do come to the office this morning to demand the payment of
their tickets; for otherwise they would, they said, do no more work; and
are, as I understand from every body that has to do with them, the most
debauched, damning, swearing rogues that ever were in the Navy, just
like their prophane commander. So to Sir W. Batten’s to sit and talk
a little, and then home to my flageolet, my heart being at pretty good
ease by a letter from my wife, brought by Saunders, that my father and
wife got well last night to their Inne and out again this morning, and
Gibson’s being got safe to Caxton at twelve last night. So to supper,
and then to bed. No news to-day of any motion of the enemy either
upwards towards Chatham or this way.