22nd. Slept but ill all the last part of the night, for fear of this
day’s success in Parliament: therefore up, and all of us all the morning
close, till almost two o’clock, collecting all we had to say and had
done from the beginning, touching the safety of the River Medway and
Chatham. And, having done this, and put it into order, we away, I not
having time to eat my dinner; and so all in my Lord Bruncker’s coach,
that is to say, Bruncker, W. Pen, T. Harvy, and myself, talking of the
other great matter with which they charge us, that is, of discharging
men by ticket, in order to our defence in case that should be asked. We
come to the Parliament-door, and there, after a little waiting till the
Committee was sat, we were, the House being very full, called in: Sir W.
Pen went in and sat as a Member; and my Lord Bruncker would not at first
go in, expecting to have a chair set for him, and his brother had bid
him not go in, till he was called for; but, after a few words, I had
occasion to mention him, and so he was called in, but without any more
chair or respect paid him than myself: and so Bruncker, and T. Harvy,
and I, were there to answer: and I had a chair brought me to lean my
books upon: and so did give them such an account, in a series of the
whole business that had passed the Office touching the matter, and so
answered all questions given me about it, that I did not perceive but
they were fully satisfied with me and the business as to our Office: and
then Commissioner Pett (who was by at all my discourse, and this held
till within an hour after candlelight, for I had candles brought in
to read my papers by) was to answer for himself, we having lodged all
matters with him for execution. But, Lord! what a tumultuous thing this
Committee is, for all the reputation they have of a great council, is
a strange consideration; there being as impertinent questions, and as
disorderly proposed, as any man could make. But Commissioner Pett, of
all men living, did make the weakest defence for himself: nothing to the
purpose, nor to satisfaction, nor certain; but sometimes one thing and
sometimes another, sometimes for himself and sometimes against him; and
his greatest failure was, that I observed, from his [not] considering
whether the question propounded was his part to answer or no, and the
thing to be done was his work to do: the want of which distinction
will overthrow him; for he concerns himself in giving an account of the
disposal of the boats, which he had no reason at all to do, or take any
blame upon him for them. He charged the not carrying up of “The Charles”
 upon the Tuesday, to the Duke of Albemarle; but I see the House is
mighty favourable to the Duke of Albemarle, and would give little weight
to it. And something of want of armes he spoke, which Sir J. Duncomb
answered with great imperiousness and earnestness; but, for all that, I
do see the House is resolved to be better satisfied in the business of
the unreadiness of Sherenesse, and want of armes and ammunition there
and every where: and all their officers were here to-day attending, but
only one called in, about armes for boats, to answer Commissioner Pett.
None of my brethren said anything but me there, but only two or three
silly words my Lord Bruncker gave, in answer to one question about the
number of men there were in the King’s Yard at the time. At last, the
House dismissed us, and shortly after did adjourne the debate till
Friday next: and my cozen Pepys did come out and joy me in my acquitting
myself so well, and so did several others, and my fellow-officers all
very brisk to see themselves so well acquitted; which makes me a little
proud, but yet not secure but we may yet meet with a back-blow which we
see not. So, with our hearts very light, Sir W. Pen and I in his coach
home, it being now near eight o’clock, and so to the office, and did a
little business by the post, and so home, hungry, and eat a good supper,
and so, with my mind well at ease, to bed. My wife not very well of
those.