29th. Up to the office all the morning, where Sir W. Pen and I look
much askewe one upon another, though afterward business made us speak
friendly enough, but yet we hate one another. At noon home to dinner,
and then to the office, where all the afternoon expecting Mr. Gawden to
come for some money I am to pay him, but he comes not, which makes me
think he is considering whether it be necessary to make the present he
hath promised, it being possible this alteration in the Controller’s
duty may make my place in the Victualling unnecessary, so that I am a
little troubled at it. Busy till late at night at the office, and Sir
W. Batten come to me, and tells me that there is newes upon the Exchange
to-day, that my Lord Sandwich’s coach and the French Embassador’s
at Madrid, meeting and contending for the way, they shot my Lord’s
postilion and another man dead; and that we have killed 25 of theirs,
and that my Lord is well. How true this is I cannot tell, there being
no newes of it at all at Court, as I am told late by one come thence, so
that I hope it is not so. By and by comes Mrs. Turner to me, to make her
complaint of her sad usage she receives from my Lord Bruncker, that he
thinks much she hath not already got another house, though he himself
hath employed her night and day ever since his first mention of the
matter, to make part of her house ready for him, as he ordered, and
promised she should stay till she had fitted herself; by which and what
discourse I do remember he had of the business before Sir W. Coventry on
Sunday last I perceive he is a rotten-hearted, false man as any else I
know, even as Sir W. Pen himself, and, therefore, I must beware of him
accordingly, and I hope I shall. I did pity the woman with all my
heart, and gave her the best council I could; and so, falling to other
discourse, I made her laugh and merry, as sad as she came to me; so that
I perceive no passion in a woman can be lasting long; and so parted
and I home, and there teaching my girle Barker part of my song “It is
decreed,” which she will sing prettily, and so after supper to bed.