9th. Up, and to the office, and at noon home to dinner, and then with my
wife and Barker by coach, and left them at Charing Cross, and I to St.
James’s, and there found Sir W. Coventry alone in his chamber, and
sat and talked with him more than I have done a great while of several
things of the Navy, how our debts and wants do unfit us for doing any
thing. He tells me he hears stories of Commissioner Pett, of selling
timber to the Navy under other names, which I told him I believe is
true, and did give him an instance. He told me also how his clerk
Floyd he hath put away for his common idlenesse and ill company, and
particularly that yesterday he was found not able to come and attend
him, by being run into the arme in a squabble, though he pretends it was
done in the streets by strangers, at nine at night, by the Maypole in
the Strand. Sir W. Coventry did write to me this morning to recommend
him another, which I could find in my heart to do W. Hewer for his good;
but do believe he will not part with me, nor have I any mind to let him
go. I would my brother were fit for it, I would adventure him there.
He insists upon an unmarried man, that can write well, and hath French
enough to transcribe it only from a copy, and may write shorthand, if it
may be. Thence with him to my Lord Chancellor at Clarendon House, to a
Committee for Tangier, where several things spoke of and proceeded on,
and particularly sending Commissioners thither before the new Governor
goes, which I think will signify as much good as any thing else that
hath been done about the place, which is none at all. I did again tell
them the badness of their credit by the time their tallies took before
they become payable, and their spending more than their fund. They seem
well satisfied with what I said, and I am glad that I may be remembered
that I do tell them the case plain; but it troubled me that I see them
hot upon it, that the Governor shall not be paymaster, which will
force me either to the providing one there to do it (which I will never
undertake), or leave the employment, which I had rather do. Mightily
pleased with the noblenesse of this house, and the brave furniture and
pictures, which indeed is very noble, and, being broke up, I with Sir G.
Carteret in his coach into Hide Park, to discourse of things, and
spent an hour in this manner with great pleasure, telling me all his
concernments, and how he is gone through with the purchase for my Lady
Jemimah and her husband; how the Treasury is like to come into the
hands of a Committee; but that not that, nor anything else, will do our
business, unless the King himself will mind his business, and how his
servants do execute their parts; he do fear an utter ruin in the state,
and that in a little time, if the King do not mind his business soon;
that the King is very kind to him, and to my Lord Sandwich, and that he
doubts not but at his coming home, which he expects about Michaelmas, he
will be very well received. But it is pretty strange how he began again
the business of the intention of a marriage of my Lord Hinchingbroke to
a daughter of my Lord Burlington’s to my Lord Chancellor, which he now
tells me as a great secret, when he told it me the last Sunday but one;
but it may be the poor man hath forgot, and I do believe he do make it
a secret, he telling me that he has not told it to any but myself, end
this day to his daughter my Lady Jemimah, who looks to lie down about
two months hence. After all this discourse we turned back and to White
Hall, where we parted, and I took up my wife at Unthanke’s, and so
home, and in our street, at the Three Tuns’ Tavern’ door, I find a great
hubbub; and what was it but two brothers have fallen out, and one killed
the other. And who should they be but the two Fieldings; one whereof,
Bazill, was page to my Lady Sandwich; and he hath killed the other,
himself being very drunk, and so is sent to Newgate. I to the office and
did as much business as my eyes would let me, and so home to supper and
to bed.