12th (Lord’s day). Up, and to my chamber, to settle some accounts there,
and by and by down comes my wife to me in her night-gown, and we begun
calmly, that upon having money to lace her gown for second mourning, she
would promise to wear white locks no more in my sight, which I, like a
severe fool, thinking not enough, begun to except against, and made her
fly out to very high terms and cry, and in her heat told me of keeping
company with Mrs. Knipp, saying, that if I would promise never to see
her more--of whom she hath more reason to suspect than I had heretofore
of Pembleton--she would never wear white locks more. This vexed me, but
I restrained myself from saying anything, but do think never to see this
woman--at least, to have her here more, but by and by I did give her
money to buy lace, and she promised to wear no more white locks while I
lived, and so all very good friends as ever, and I to my business, and
she to dress herself. Against noon we had a coach ready for us, and she
and I to White Hall, where I went to see whether Sir G. Carteret was at
dinner or no, our design being to make a visit there, and I found them
set down, which troubled me, for I would not then go up, but back to the
coach to my wife, and she and I homeward again, and in our way bethought
ourselves of going alone, she and I, to go to a French house to dinner,
and so enquired out Monsieur Robins, my perriwigg-maker, who keeps an
ordinary, and in an ugly street in Covent Garden, did find him at the
door, and so we in; and in a moment almost had the table covered, and
clean glasses, and all in the French manner, and a mess of potage
first, and then a couple of pigeons a la esterve, and then a piece of
boeuf-a-la-mode, all exceeding well seasoned, and to our great liking;
at least it would have been anywhere else but in this bad street, and in
a perriwigg-maker’s house; but to see the pleasant and ready attendance
that we had, and all things so desirous to please, and ingenious in the
people, did take me mightily. Our dinner cost us 6s., and so my wife
and I away to Islington, it being a fine day, and thence to Sir G.
Whitmore’s house, where we ‘light, and walked over the fields to
Kingsland, and back again; a walk, I think, I have not taken these
twenty years; but puts me in mind of my boy’s time, when I boarded at
Kingsland, and used to shoot with my bow and arrows in these fields. A
very pretty place it is; and little did any of my friends think I should
come to walk in these fields in this condition and state that I am. Then
took coach again, and home through Shoreditch; and at home my wife finds
Barker to have been abroad, and telling her so many lies about it, that
she struck her, and the wench said she would not stay with her: so I
examined the wench, and found her in so many lies myself, that I was
glad to be rid of her, and so resolved having her go away to-morrow. So
my wife and W. Hewer and I to supper, and then he and I to my chamber to
begin the draught of the report from this office to the Duke of York in
the case of Mr. Carcasse, which I sat up till midnight to do, and then
to bed, believing it necessary to have it done, and to do it plainly,
for it is not to be endured the trouble that this rascal hath put us to,
and the disgrace he hath brought upon this office.