14th. Up, and by water to White Hall, and thence walked to St. James’s,
and there to Mr. Wren’s; and he told me that my business was done about
my warrant on the Maybolt Galliott; which I did see, and though it was
not so full in the reciting of my services as the other was in that of
Sir W. Pen’s, yet I was well pleased with it, and do intend to fetch it
away anon. Thence with Sir Thomas Allen, in a little sorry coach which
he hath set up of late, and Sir Jeremy Smith, to White Hall, and there
I took water and went to Westminster Hall, and there hear that the House
is this day again upon the business of giving the King the thanks of the
House for his speech, and, among other things, for laying aside of my
Lord Chancellor. Thence I to Mrs. Martin’s, where by appointment comes
to me Mrs. Howlett, which I was afraid was to have told me something of
my freedom with her daughter, but it was not so, but only to complain
to me of her son-in-law, how he abuses and makes a slave of her, and his
mother is one that encourages him in it, so that they are at this time
upon very bad terms one with another, and desires that I would take a
time to advise him and tell him what it becomes him to do, which office
I am very glad of, for some ends of my own also con sa fille, and there
drank and parted, I mightily satisfied with this business, and so home
by water with Sir W. Warren, who happened to be at Westminster, and
there I pretty strange to him, and little discourse, and there at the
office Lord Bruncker, W. Pen, T. Hater and I did some business, and so
home to dinner, and thence I out to visit Sir G. Carteret and ladies
there; and from him do understand that the King himself (but this
he told me as a great secret) is satisfied that this thanks which he
expects from the House, for the laying aside of my Lord Chancellor, is
a thing irregular; but, since it is come into the House, he do think it
necessary to carry it on, and will have it, and hath made his mind known
to be so, to some of the House. But Sir G. Carteret do say he knows
nothing of what my Lord Bruncker told us to-day, that the King was angry
with the Duke of York yesterday, and advised him not to hinder what he
had a mind to have done, touching this business; which is news very bad,
if true. Here I visited my Lady Carteret, who hath been sick some time,
but now pretty well, but laid on her bed. Thence to my Lord Crew, to see
him after my coming out of the country, and he seems satisfied with some
steps they have made in my absence towards my Lord Sandwich’s relief for
money: and so I have no more to do, nor will trouble myself more about
it till they send for me. He tells me also that the King will have the
thanks of the House go on: and commends my Lord Keeper’s speech for all
but what he was forced to say, about the reason of the King’s sending
away the House so soon the last time, when they were met, but this he
was forced to do. Thence to Westminster Hall, and there walked with Mr.
Scowen, who tells me that it is at last carried in the House that the
thanks shall be given to the King--among other things, particularly for
the removal of my Lord Chancellor; but he tells me it is a strange act,
and that which he thinks would never have been, but that the King did
insist upon it, that, since it come into the House, it might not be let
fall. After walking there awhile I took coach and to the Duke of York’s
House, and there went in for nothing into the pit, at the last act, to
see Sir Martin Marrall, and met my wife, who was there, and my brother,
and W. Hewer and Willett, and carried them home, still being pleased
with the humour of the play, almost above all that ever I saw. Home, and
there do find that John Bowles is not yet come thither. I suppose he is
playing the good fellow in the town. So to the office a while, and then
home to supper and to bed.