25th. Up, and with Sir W. Pen in his new chariot (which indeed is plain,
but pretty and more fashionable in shape than any coach he hath, and yet
do not cost him, harness and all, above L32) to White Hall; where staid
a very little: and thence to St. James’s to [Sir] W. Coventry, whom I
have not seen since before the coming of the Dutch into the river, nor
did indeed know how well to go see him, for shame either to him or me,
or both of us, to find ourselves in so much misery. I find that he and
his fellow-Treasurers are in the utmost want of money, and do find fault
with Sir G. Carteret, that, having kept the mystery of borrowing money
to himself so long, to the ruin of the nation, as [Sir] W. Coventry said
in words to [Sir] W. Pen and me, he should now lay it aside and come to
them for money for every penny he hath, declaring that he can raise no
more: which, I confess, do appear to me the most like ill-will of any
thing that I have observed of [Sir] W. Coventry, when he himself did
tell us, on another occasion at the same time, that the bankers who used
to furnish them money are not able to lend a farthing, and he knows well
enough that that was all the mystery [Sir] G. Carteret did use, that is,
only his credit with them. He told us the masters and owners of the
two ships that I had complained of, for not readily setting forth their
ships, which we had taken up to make men-of-war, had been yesterday with
the King and Council, and had made their case so well understood, that
the King did owe them for what they had earned the last year, that they
could not set them out again without some money or stores out of the
King’s Yards; the latter of which [Sir] W. Coventry said must be done,
for that they were not able to raise money for them, though it was but
L200 a ship: which do skew us our condition to be so bad, that I am in
a total despair of ever having the nation do well. After talking awhile,
and all out of heart with stories of want of seamen, and seamen’s
running away, and their demanding a month’s advance, and our being
forced to give seamen 3s. a-day to go hence to work at Chatham, and
other things that show nothing but destruction upon us; for it is
certain that, as it now is, the seamen of England, in my conscience,
would, if they could, go over and serve the King of France or Holland
rather than us. Up to the Duke of York to his chamber, where he seems to
be pretty easy, and now and then merry; but yet one may perceive in
all their minds there is something of trouble and care, and with good
reason. Thence to White Hall, and with Sir W. Pen, by chariot; and there
in the Court met with my Lord Anglesey: and he to talk with [Sir]
W. Pen, and told him of the masters of ships being with the Council
yesterday, and that we were not in condition, though the men were
willing, to furnish them with L200 of money, already due to them as
earned by them the last year, to enable them to set out their ships
again this year for the King: which he is amazed at; and when I told
him, “My Lord, this is a sad instance of the condition we are in,” he
answered, that it was so indeed, and sighed: and so parted: and he up to
the Council-chamber, where I perceive they sit every morning, and I to
Westminster Hall, where it is Term time. I met with none I knew, nor
did desire it, but only past through the-Hall and so back again, and
by coach home to dinner, being weary indeed of seeing the world, and
thinking it high time for me to provide against the foul weather that is
certainly coming upon us. So to the office, and there [Sir] W. Pen and
I did some business, and then home to dinner, where my wife pleases
me mightily with what she can do upon the flageolet, and then I to the
office again, and busy all the afternoon, and it is worth noting that
the King and Council, in their order of the 23rd instant, for unloading
three merchant-ships taken up for the King’s service for men-of-war, do
call the late coming of the Dutch “an invasion.” I was told, yesterday,
that Mr. Oldenburg, our Secretary at Gresham College, is put into
the Tower, for writing newes to a virtuoso in France, with whom he
constantly corresponds in philosophical matters; which makes it very
unsafe at this time to write, or almost do any thing. Several captains
come to the office yesterday and to-day, complaining that their men come
and go when they will, and will not be commanded, though they are paid
every night, or may be. Nay, this afternoon comes Harry Russell from
Gravesend, telling us that the money carried down yesterday for the
Chest at Chatham had like to have been seized upon yesterday, in the
barge there, by seamen, who did beat our watermen: and what men should
these be but the boat’s crew of Sir Fretcheville Hollis, who used to
brag so much of the goodness and order of his men, and his command over
them. Busy all the afternoon at the office. Towards night I with Mr.
Kinaston to White Hall about a Tangier order, but lost our labour, only
met Sir H. Cholmly there, and he tells me great newes; that this day
in Council the King hath declared that he will call his Parliament in
thirty days: which is the best newes I have heard a great while, and
will, if any thing, save the kingdom. How the King come to be advised to
this, I know not; but he tells me that it was against the Duke of
York’s mind flatly, who did rather advise the King to raise money as
he pleased; and against the Chancellor’s, who told the King that Queen
Elizabeth did do all her business in eighty-eight without calling a
Parliament, and so might he do, for anything he saw. But, blessed be
God! it is done; and pray God it may hold, though some of us must surely
go to the pot, for all must be flung up to them, or nothing will be
done. So back home, and my wife down by water, I sent her, with Mrs.
Hewer and her son, W. Hewer, to see the sunk ships, while I staid at the
office, and in the evening was visited by Mr. Roberts the merchant by us
about the getting him a ship cleared from serving the King as a man of
war, which I will endeavour to do. So home to supper and to bed.