11th. Up, and to Simpson at work in my office, and thence with Sir
G. Carteret (who come to talk with me) to Broad Streete, where great
crowding of people for money, at which he blamed himself. Thence with
him and Lord Bruncker to Captain Cocke’s (he out of doors), and there
drank their morning draught, and thence [Sir] G. Carteret and I toward
the Temple in coach together; and there he did tell me how the King do
all he can in the world to overthrow my Lord Chancellor, and that notice
is taken of every man about the King that is not seen to promote the
ruine of the Chancellor; and that this being another great day in
his business, he dares not but be there. He tells me that as soon as
Secretary Morrice brought the Great Seale from my Lord Chancellor, Bab.
May fell upon his knees, and catched the King about the legs, and joyed
him, and said that this was the first time that ever he could call
him King of England, being freed from this great man: which was a most
ridiculous saying. And he told me that, when first my Lord Gerard, a
great while ago, come to the King, and told him that the Chancellor did
say openly that the King was a lazy person and not fit to govern,
which is now made one of the things in the people’s mouths against the
Chancellor, “Why,” says the King, “that is no news, for he hath told me
so twenty times, and but the other day he told me so;” and made matter
of mirth at it: but yet this light discourse is likely to prove bad to
him. I ‘light at the Temple, and went to my tailor’s and mercer’s about
a cloake, to choose the stuff, and so to my bookseller’s and bought some
books, and so home to dinner, and Simpson my joyner with me, and after
dinner, my wife, and I, and Willett, to the King’s play-house, and there
saw “The Indian Emperour,” a good play, but not so good as people cry it
up, I think, though above all things Nell’s ill speaking of a great part
made me mad. Thence with great trouble and charge getting a coach (it
being now and having been all this day a most cold and foggy, dark,
thick day), we home, and there I to my office, and saw it made clean
from top to bottom, till I feared I took cold in walking in a damp room
while it is in washing, and so home to supper and to bed. This day I had
a whole doe sent me by Mr. Hozier, which is a fine present, and I had
the umbles of it for dinner. This day I hear Kirton, my bookseller, poor
man, is dead, I believe, of grief for his losses by the fire.