12th. Up betimes and to my chamber, there doing business, and by and by
comes Greeting and begun a new month with him, and now to learn to set
anything from the notes upon the flageolet, but, Lord! to see how like a
fool he goes about to give me direction would make a man mad. I then
out and by coach to White Hall and to the Treasury chamber, where did
a little business, and thence to the Exchequer to Burges, about Tangier
business, and so back again, stepping into the Hall a little, and then
homeward by coach, and met at White Hall with Sir H. Cholmly, and so
into his coach, and he with me to the Excise Office, there to do a
little business also, in the way he telling me that undoubtedly the
peace is concluded; for he did stand yesterday where he did hear part
of the discourse at the Council table, and there did hear the King argue
for it. Among other things, that the spirits of the seamen were down,
and the forces of our enemies are grown too great and many for us, and
he would not have his subjects overpressed; for he knew an Englishman
would do as much as any man upon hopeful terms; but where he sees he is
overpressed, he despairs soon as any other; and, besides that, they have
already such a load of dejection upon them, that they will not be in
temper a good while again. He heard my Lord Chancellor say to the King,
“Sir,” says he, “the whole world do complain publickly of treachery,
that things have been managed falsely by some of his great
ministers.”--“Sir,” says he, “I am for your Majesty’s falling into a
speedy enquiry into the truth of it, and, where you meet with it, punish
it. But, at the same time, consider what you have to do, and make use of
your time for having a peace; for more money will not be given without
much trouble, nor is it, I fear, to be had of the people, nor will a
little do it to put us into condition of doing our business.” But Sir
H. Cholmly tells me he [the] Chancellors did say the other day at his
table, “Treachery!” says he; “I could wish we could prove there
was anything of that in it; for that would imply some wit and
thoughtfulness; but we are ruined merely by folly and neglect.” And
so Sir H. Cholmly tells me they did all argue for peace, and so he
do believe that the King hath agreed to the three points Mr. Coventry
brought over, which I have mentioned before, and is gone with them back.
He tells me further that the Duke of Buckingham was before the Council
the other day, and there did carry it very submissively and pleasingly
to the King; but to my Lord Arlington, who do prosecute the business,
he was most bitter and sharp, and very slighting. As to the letter about
his employing a man to cast the King’s nativity, says he to the King,
“Sir,” says he, “this is none of my hand, and I refer it to your Majesty
whether you do not know this hand.” The King answered, that it was
indeed none of his, and that he knew whose it was, but could not recall
it presently. “Why,” says he, “it is my sister of Richmond’s, some
frolick or other of hers of some certain person; and there is nothing of
the King’s name in it, but it is only said to be his by supposition, as
is said.” The King, it seems, seemed not very much displeased with
what the Duke had said; but, however, he is still in the Tower, and no
discourse of his being out in haste, though my Lady Castlemayne hath
so far solicited for him that the King and she are quite fallen out: he
comes not to her, nor hath for some three or four days; and parted with
very foul words, the King calling her a whore, and a jade that meddled
with things she had nothing to do with at all: and she calling him fool;
and told him if he was not a fool, he would not suffer his businesses
to be carried on by fellows that did not understand them, and cause
his best subjects, and those best able to serve him, to be imprisoned;
meaning the Duke of Buckingham. And it seems she was not only for his
liberty, but to be restored to all his places; which, it is thought, he
will never be. While we were at the Excise office talking with Mr. Ball,
it was computed that the Parliament had given the King for this war
only, besides all prizes, and besides the L200,000 which he was to spend
of his own revenue, to guard the sea above L5,000,000 and odd L100,000;
which is a most prodigious sum. Sir H. Cholmly, as a true English
gentleman, do decry the King’s expenses of his Privy-purse, which
in King James’s time did not rise to above L5000 a year, and in King
Charles’s to L10,000, do now cost us above L100,000, besides the great
charge of the monarchy, as the Duke of York L100,000 of it, and other
limbs of the Royal family, and the guards, which, for his part, says he,
“I would have all disbanded, for the King is not the better by them, and
would be as safe without them; for we have had no rebellions to make him
fear anything.” But, contrarily, he is now raising of a land-army, which
this Parliament and kingdom will never bear; besides, the commanders
they put over them are such as will never be able to raise or command
them; but the design is, and the Duke of York, he says, is hot for it,
to have a land-army, and so to make the government like that of France,
but our princes have not brains, or at least care and forecast enough to
do that. It is strange how he and every body do now-a-days reflect upon
Oliver, and commend him, what brave things he did, and made all the
neighbour princes fear him; while here a prince, come in with all the
love and prayers and good liking of his people, who have given greater
signs of loyalty and willingness to serve him with their estates than
ever was done by any people, hath lost all so soon, that it is a miracle
what way a man could devise to lose so much in so little time. Thence he
set me down at my Lord Crew’s and away, and I up to my Lord, where Sir
Thomas Crew was, and by and by comes Mr. Caesar, who teaches my Lady’s
page upon the lute, and here Mr. Caesar did play some very fine things
indeed, to my great liking. Here was my Lord Hinchingbroke also, newly
come from Hinchingbroke, where all well, but methinks I knowing in what
case he stands for money by his demands to me and the report Mr. Moore
gives of the management of the family, makes me, God forgive me! to
contemn him, though I do really honour and pity them, though they
deserve it not, that have so good an estate and will live beyond it.
To dinner, and very good discourse with my Lord. And after dinner Sir
Thomas Crew and I alone, and he tells me how I am mightily in esteem
with the Parliament; there being harangues made in the House to the
Speaker, of Mr. Pepys’s readiness and civility to show them every thing,
which I am at this time very glad of. He tells me the news of the King
and my Lady Castlemayne which I have wrote already this day, and the
design of the Parliament to look into things very well before they give
any more money, and I pray God they may. Thence, after dinner, to St.
James’s, but missed Sir W. Coventry, and so home, and there find my wife
in a dogged humour for my not dining at home, and I did give her a pull
by the nose and some ill words, which she provoked me to by something
she spoke, that we fell extraordinarily out, insomuch, that I going to
the office to avoid further anger, she followed me in a devilish manner
thither, and with much ado I got her into the garden out of hearing, to
prevent shame, and so home, and by degrees I found it necessary to calme
her, and did, and then to the office, where pretty late, and then to
walk with her in the garden, and so to supper, and pretty good friends,
and so to bed with my mind very quiet.