13th. No sooner up but hear the sad newes confirmed of the Royall
Charles being taken by them, and now in fitting by them--which Pett
should have carried up higher by our several orders, and deserves,
therefore, to be hanged for not doing it--and turning several others;
and that another fleete is come up into the Hope. Upon which newes the
King and Duke of York have been below--[Below London Bridge.]--since
four o’clock in the morning, to command the sinking of ships at
Barking-Creeke, and other places, to stop their coming up higher: which
put me into such a fear, that I presently resolved of my father’s and
wife’s going into the country; and, at two hours’ warning, they did go
by the coach this day, with about L1300 in gold in their night-bag.
Pray God give them good passage, and good care to hide it when they come
home! but my heart is full of fear: They gone, I continued in fright and
fear what to do with the rest. W. Hewer hath been at the banker’s, and
hath got L500 out of Backewell’s hands of his own money; but they are
so called upon that they will be all broke, hundreds coming to them for
money: and their answer is, “It is payable at twenty days--when the days
are out, we will pay you;” and those that are not so, they make tell
over their money, and make their bags false, on purpose to give cause to
retell it, and so spend time. I cannot have my 200 pieces of gold again
for silver, all being bought up last night that were to be had, and
sold for 24 and 25s. a-piece. So I must keep the silver by me, which
sometimes I think to fling into the house of office, and then again know
not how I shall come by it, if we be made to leave the office. Every
minute some one or other calls for this or that order; and so I forced
to be at the office, most of the day, about the fire-ships which are
to be suddenly fitted out: and it’s a most strange thing that we hear
nothing from any of my brethren at Chatham; so that we are wholly in the
dark, various being the reports of what is done there; insomuch that
I sent Mr. Clapham express thither to see how matters go: I did, about
noon, resolve to send Mr. Gibson away after my wife with another 1000
pieces, under colour of an express to Sir Jeremy Smith; who is, as I
hear, with some ships at Newcastle; which I did really send to him, and
may, possibly, prove of good use to the King; for it is possible, in the
hurry of business, they may not think of it at Court, and the charge of
an express is not considerable to the King. So though I intend Gibson no
further than to Huntingdon I direct him to send the packet forward. My
business the most of the afternoon is listening to every body that comes
to the office, what news? which is variously related, some better, some
worse, but nothing certain. The King and Duke of York up and down all
the day here and there: some time on Tower Hill, where the City militia
was; where the King did make a speech to them, that they should venture
themselves no further than he would himself. I also sent, my mind being
in pain, Saunders after my wife and father, to overtake them at their
night’s lodgings, to see how matters go with them. In the evening, I
sent for my cousin Sarah [Gyles] and her husband, who come; and I did
deliver them my chest of writings about Brampton, and my brother Tom’s
papers, and my journalls, which I value much; and did send my two
silver flaggons to Kate Joyce’s: that so, being scattered what I have,
something might be saved. I have also made a girdle, by which, with some
trouble, I do carry about me L300 in gold about my body, that I may not
be without something in case I should be surprised: for I think, in
any nation but our’s, people that appear (for we are not indeed so) so
faulty as we, would have their throats cut. In the evening comes Mr.
Pelling, and several others, to the office, and tell me that never were
people so dejected as they are in the City all over at this day; and do
talk most loudly, even treason; as, that we are bought and sold--that
we are betrayed by the Papists, and others, about the King; cry out that
the office of the Ordnance hath been so backward as no powder to have
been at Chatham nor Upnor Castle till such a time, and the carriages all
broken; that Legg is a Papist; that Upnor, the old good castle built by
Queen Elizabeth, should be lately slighted; that the ships at Chatham
should not be carried up higher. They look upon us as lost, and remove
their families and rich goods in the City; and do think verily that the
French, being come down with his army to Dunkirke, it is to invade us,
and that we shall be invaded. Mr. Clerke, the solicitor, comes to me
about business, and tells me that he hears that the King hath chosen
Mr. Pierpont and Vaughan of the West, Privy-councillors; that my Lord
Chancellor was affronted in the Hall this day, by people telling him
of his Dunkirke house; and that there are regiments ordered to be got
together, whereof to be commanders my Lord Fairfax, Ingoldsby, Bethell,
Norton, and Birch, and other Presbyterians; and that Dr. Bates will have
liberty to preach. Now, whether this be true or not, I know not; but do
think that nothing but this will unite us together. Late at night comes
Mr. Hudson, the cooper, my neighbour, and tells me that he come from
Chatham this evening at five o’clock, and saw this afternoon “The Royal
James,” “Oake,” and “London,” burnt by the enemy with their fire-ships:
that two or three men-of-war come up with them, and made no more of
Upnor Castle’s shooting, than of a fly; that those ships lay below Upnor
Castle, but therein, I conceive, he is in an error; that the Dutch are
fitting out “The Royall Charles;” that we shot so far as from the Yard
thither, so that the shot did no good, for the bullets grazed on the
water; that Upnor played hard with their guns at first, but slowly
afterwards, either from the men being beat off, or their powder spent.
But we hear that the fleete in the Hope is not come up any higher the
last flood; and Sir W. Batten tells me that ships are provided to sink
in the River, about Woolwich, that will prevent their coming up higher
if they should attempt it. I made my will also this day, and did give
all I had equally between my father and wife, and left copies of it in
each of Mr. Hater and W. Hewer’s hands, who both witnessed the will,
and so to supper and then to bed, and slept pretty well, but yet often
waking.