23rd. Up, and with Sir W. Batten and Sir W. Pen to White Hall, and there
to the Duke of York, and did our usual business. Having done there, I to
St. James’s, to see the organ Mrs. Turner told me of the other night, of
my late Lord Aubigney’s; and I took my Lord Bruncker with me, he being
acquainted with my present Lord Almoner, Mr. Howard, brother to the Duke
of Norfolke; so he and I thither and did see the organ, but I do not
like it, it being but a bauble, with a virginal! joining to it: so I
shall not meddle with it. Here we sat and talked with him a good while,
and he seems a good-natured gentleman: here I observed the deske which
he hath, [made] to remove, and is fastened to one of the armes of his
chayre. I do also observe the counterfeit windows there was, in the form
of doors with looking-glasses instead of windows, which makes the room
seem both bigger and lighter, I think; and I have some thoughts to have
the like in one of my rooms. He discoursed much of the goodness of the
musique in Rome, but could not tell me how long musique had been in any
perfection in that church, which I would be glad to know. He speaks much
of the great buildings that this Pope,

     [Fabio Chigi, of Siena, succeeded Innocent X. in 1655 as Alexander
     VII.  He died May, 1667, and was succeeded by Clement IX.]

whom, in mirth to us, he calls Antichrist, hath done in his time. Having
done with the discourse, we away, and my Lord and I walking into the
Park back again, I did observe the new buildings: and my Lord, seeing
I had a desire to see them, they being the place for the priests and
fryers, he took me back to my Lord Almoner; and he took us quite through
the whole house and chapel, and the new monastery, showing me most
excellent pieces in wax-worke: a crucifix given by a Pope to Mary Queen
of Scotts, where a piece of the Cross is;

     [Pieces of “the Cross” were formerly held in such veneration, and
     were so common, that it has been often said enough existed to build
     a ship.  Most readers will remember the distinction which Sir W.
     Scott represents Louis XI. (with great appreciation of that
     monarch’s character), as drawing between an oath taken on a false
     piece and one taken on a piece of the true cross.  Sir Thomas More,
     a very devout believer in relics, says (“Works,” p. 119), that
     Luther wished, in a sermon of his, that he had in his hand all the
     pieces of the Holy Cross; and said that if he so had, he would throw
     them there as never sun should shine on them:--and for what
     worshipful reason would the wretch do such villainy to the cross of
     Christ?  Because, as he saith, that there is so much gold now
     bestowed about the garnishing of the pieces of the Cross, that there
     is none left for poore folke.  Is not this a high reason?  As though
     all the gold that is now bestowed about the pieces of the Holy Cross
     would not have failed to have been given to poor men, if they had
     not been bestowed about the garnishing of the Cross! and as though
     there were nothing lost, but what is bestowed about Christ’s Cross!”
      “Wolsey, says Cavendish, on his fall, gave to Norris, who brought
     him a ring of gold as a token of good will from Henry, “a little
     chaine of gold, made like a bottle chain, with a cross of gold,
     wherein was a piece of the Holy Cross, which he continually wore
     about his neck, next his body; and said, furthermore, ‘Master
     Norris, I assure you, when I was in prosperity, although it seem but
     small in value, yet I would not gladly have departed with the same
     for a thousand pounds.’” Life, ed.  1852, p. 167.  Evelyn mentions,
     “Diary,” November 17th, 1664, that he saw in one of the chapels in
     St. Peter’s a crucifix with a piece of the true cross in it.
     Amongst the jewels of Mary Queen of Scots was a cross of gold, which
     had been pledged to Hume of Blackadder for L1000 (Chalmers’s “Life,”
      vol. i., p. 31 ).--B.]

two bits set in the manner of a cross in the foot of the crucifix:
several fine pictures, but especially very good prints of holy pictures.
I saw the dortoire--[dormitory]--and the cells of the priests, and
we went into one; a very pretty little room, very clean, hung with
pictures, set with books. The Priest was in his cell, with his hair
clothes to his skin, bare-legged, with a sandal! only on, and his little
bed without sheets, and no feather bed; but yet, I thought, soft enough.
His cord about his middle; but in so good company, living with ease, I
thought it a very good life. A pretty library they have. And I was in
the refectoire, where every man his napkin, knife, cup of earth, and
basin of the same; and a place for one to sit and read while the rest
are at meals. And into the kitchen I went, where a good neck of mutton
at the fire, and other victuals boiling. I do not think they fared very
hard. Their windows all looking into a fine garden and the Park; and
mighty pretty rooms all. I wished myself one of the Capuchins. Having
seen what we could here, and all with mighty pleasure, so away with
the Almoner in his coach, talking merrily about the difference in our
religions, to White Hall, and there we left him. I in my Lord Bruncker’s
coach, he carried me to the Savoy, and there we parted. I to the Castle
Tavern, where was and did come all our company, Sir W. Batten, [Sir] W.
Pen, [Sir] R. Ford, and our Counsel Sir Ellis Layton, Walt Walker, Dr.
Budd, Mr. Holder, and several others, and here we had a bad dinner
of our preparing, and did discourse something of our business of our
prizes, which was the work of the day. I staid till dinner was over, and
there being no use of me I away after dinner without taking leave, and
to the New Exchange, there to take up my wife and Mercer, and to Temple
Bar to the Ordinary, and had a dish of meat for them, they having not
dined, and thence to the King’s house, and there saw “The Numerous
Lieutenant,” a silly play, I think; only the Spirit in it that grows
very tall, and then sinks again to nothing, having two heads breeding
upon one, and then Knipp’s singing, did please us. Here, in a box above,
we spied Mrs. Pierce; and, going out, they called us, and so we staid
for them; and Knipp took us all in, and brought to us Nelly; a most
pretty woman, who acted the great part of Coelia to-day very fine,
and did it pretty well: I kissed her, and so did my wife; and a mighty
pretty soul she is. We also saw Mrs. Halls which is my little Roman-nose
black girl, that is mighty pretty: she is usually called Betty. Knipp
made us stay in a box and see the dancing preparatory to to-morrow for
“The Goblins,” a play of Suckling’s, not acted these twenty-five years;
which was pretty; and so away thence, pleased with this sight also, and
specially kissing of Nell. We away, Mr. Pierce and I, on foot to his
house, the women by coach. In our way we find the Guards of horse in
the street, and hear the occasion to be news that the seamen are in
a mutiny, which put me into a great fright; so away with my wife and
Mercer home preparing against to-morrow night to have Mrs. Pierce and
Knipp and a great deal more company to dance; and, when I come home,
hear of no disturbance there of the seamen, but that one of them, being
arrested to-day, others do go and rescue him. So to the office a little,
and then home to supper, and to my chamber awhile, and then to bed.