17th. Up, and being sent for by my Lady Batten, I to her, and there
she found fault with my not seeing her since her being a widow, which
I excused as well as I could, though it is a fault, but it is my nature
not to be forward in visits. But here she told me her condition, which
is good enough, being sole executrix, to the disappointment of all her
husband’s children, and prayed my friendship about the accounts of the
prizes, which I promised her. And here do see what creatures widows are
in weeping for their husbands, and then presently leaving off; but I
cannot wonder at it, the cares of the world taking place of all other
passions. Thence to the office, where all the morning busy, and at noon
home to dinner, where Mr. John Andrews and his wife come and dined with
me, and pretty merry we were, only I out of humour the greatest part
of the dinner, by reason that my people had forgot to get wine ready,
I having none in my house, which I cannot say now these almost three
years, I think, without having two or three sorts, by which we were fain
to stay a great while, while some could be fetched. When it come I begun
to be merry, and merry we were, but it was an odd, strange thing to
observe of Mr. Andrews what a fancy he hath to raw meat, that he eats it
with no pleasure unless the blood run about his chops, which it did now
by a leg of mutton that was not above half boiled; but, it seems, at
home all his meat is dressed so, and beef and all, and [he] eats it so
at nights also. Here most of our discourse is of the business of the
Parliament, who run on mighty furiously, having yesterday been almost
all the morning complaining against some high proceedings of my Lord
Chief Justice Keeling, that the gentlemen of the country did complain
against him in the House, and run very high. It is the man that did fall
out with my cozen Roger Pepys, once, at the Assizes there, and would
have laid him by the heels; but, it seems, a very able lawyer. After
dinner I to the office, where we all met with intent to proceed to
the publique sale of several prize ships, but upon discourse my Lord
Anglesey did discover (which troubled me that he that is a stranger
almost should do more than we ourselves could) that the appraisements
made by our officers were not above half of what he had been offered
for one of them, and did make it good by bringing a gentleman to give us
L700 for the Wildboare, which they valued but at L276, which made us
all startle and stop the sale, and I did propose to acquaint the Duke of
York with it, and accordingly we did agree on it, and I wrote a severe
letter about it, and we are to attend him with it to-morrow about it.
This afternoon my Lord Anglesey tells us that the House of Commons
have this morning run into the inquiry in many things; as, the sale of
Dunkirke, the dividing of the fleete the last year, the business of the
prizes with my Lord Sandwich, and many other things; so that now they
begin to fall close upon it, and God knows what will be the end of it,
but a Committee they have chosen to inquire into the miscarriages of
the war. Having done, and being a little tired, Sir W. Pen and I in his
coach out to Mile End Green, and there drank a cup of Byde’s ale, and so
talking about the proceedings of Parliament, and how little a thing
the King is become to be forced to suffer it, though I declare my being
satisfied that things should be enquired into, we back again home, and I
to my office to my letters, and so home to supper and to bed.