13th (Lord’s day). Up, and by water to White Hall, and thence walked to
Sir W. Coventry’s lodgings, but he was gone out, so I to St. James’s,
and there to the Duke of York’s chamber: and there he was dressing; and
many Lords and Parliament-men come to kiss his hands, they being newly
come to town. And there the Duke of York did of himself call me to him,
and tell me that he had spoke to the King, and that the King had granted
me the ship I asked for; and did, moreover, say that he was mightily
satisfied with my service, and that he would be willing to do anything
that was in his power for me: which he said with mighty kindness; which
I did return him thanks for, and departed with mighty joy, more than I
did expect. And so walked over the Park to White Hall, and there met
Sir H. Cholmly, who walked with me, and told me most of the news I heard
last night of the Parliament; and thinks they will do all things very
well, only they will be revenged of my Lord Chancellor; and says,
however, that he thinks there will be but two things proved on him; and
that one is, that he may have said to the King, and to others, words
to breed in the King an ill opinion of the Parliament--that they were
factious, and that it was better to dissolve them: and this, he thinks,
they will be able to prove; but what this will amount to, he knows not.
And next, that he hath taken money for several bargains that have been
made with the Crown; and did instance one that is already complained
of: but there are so many more involved in it, that, should they unravel
things of this sort, every body almost will be more or less concerned.
But these are the two great points which he thinks they will insist
on, and prove against him. Thence I to the Chapel, and there heard the
sermon and a pretty good anthem, and so home by water to dinner, where
Bowies and brother, and a good dinner, and in the afternoon to make good
my journal to this day, and so by water again to White Hall, and thence
only walked to Mrs. Martin’s, and there sat with her and her sister
and Borroughs... and there drank and talked and away by water home, and
there walked with Sir W. Pen, and told him what the Duke of York told
me to-day about the ship I begged; and he was knave enough, of his own
accord, but, to be sure, in order to his own advantage, to offer me to
send for the master of the vessel, “The Maybolt Galliott,” and bid him
to get her furnished as for a long voyage, and I to take no notice of
it, that she might be the more worth to me: so that here he is a very
knave to the King, and I doubt not his being the same to me on occasion.
So in a doors and supped with my wife and brother, W. Hewer, and
Willett, and so evened with W. Hewer for my expenses upon the road this
last journey, and do think that the whole journey will cost me little
less than L18 or L20, one way or other; but I am well pleased with it,
and so after supper to bed.