29th. Up, and Mr. Moore comes to me, and among other things tells me
that my Lord Crew and his friends take it very ill of me that my Lord
Sandwich’s sea-fee should be retrenched, and so reported from this
Office, and I give them no notice of it. The thing, though I know to be
false--at least, that nothing went from our office towards it--yet it
troubled me, and therefore after the office rose I went and dined with
my Lord Crew, and before dinner I did enter into that discourse, and
laboured to satisfy him; but found, though he said little, yet that he
was not yet satisfied; but after dinner did pray me to go and see how
it was, whether true or no. Did tell me if I was not their friend, they
could trust to nobody, and that he did not forget my service and love to
my Lord, and adventures for him in dangerous times, and therefore would
not willingly doubt me now; but yet asked my pardon if, upon this news,
he did begin to fear it. This did mightily trouble me: so I away thence
to White Hall, but could do nothing. So home, and there wrote all my
letters, and then, in the evening, to White Hall again, and there
met Sir Richard Browne, Clerk to the Committee for retrenchments, who
assures me no one word was ever yet mentioned about my Lord’s salary.
This pleased me, and I to Sir G. Carteret, who I find in the same doubt
about it, and assured me he saw it in our original report, my Lord’s
name with a discharge against it. This, though I know to be false, or
that it must be a mistake in my clerk, I went back to Sir R. Browne and
got a sight of their paper, and find how the mistake arose, by the ill
copying of it out for the Council from our paper sent to the Duke of
York, which I took away with me and shewed Sir G. Carteret, and thence
to my Lord Crew, and the mistake ended very merrily, and to all our
contents, particularly my own, and so home, and to the office, and
then to my chamber late, and so to supper and to bed. I find at Sir G.
Carteret’s that they do mightily joy themselves in the hopes of my Lord
Chancellor’s getting over this trouble; and I make them believe, and so,
indeed, I do believe he will, that my Lord Chancellor is become popular
by it. I find by all hands that the Court is at this day all to pieces,
every man of a faction of one sort or other, so as it is to be feared
what it will come to. But that, that pleases me is, I hear to-night that
Mr. Bruncker is turned away yesterday by the Duke of York, for some bold
words he was heard by Colonel Werden to say in the garden, the day
the Chancellor was with the King--that he believed the King would be
hectored out of everything. For this the Duke of York, who all say hath
been very strong for his father-in-law at this trial, hath turned him
away: and every body, I think, is glad of it; for he was a pestilent
rogue, an atheist, that would have sold his King and country for 6d.
almost, so covetous and wicked a rogue he is, by all men’s report. But
one observed to me, that there never was the occasion of men’s holding
their tongues at Court and everywhere else as there is at this day, for
nobody knows which side will be uppermost.