4th. Up, and seeing things put in order for a dinner at my house to-day,
I to the office awhile, and about noon home, and there saw all things
in good order. Anon comes our company; my Lord Bruncker, Sir W. Pen,
his lady, and Pegg, and her servant, Mr. Lowther, my Lady Batten (Sir W.
Batten being forced to dine at Sir K. Ford’s, being invited), Mr. Turner
and his wife. Here I had good room for ten, and no more would my table
have held well, had Sir J. Minnes, who was fallen lame, and his sister,
and niece, and Sir W. Batten come, which was a great content to me to be
without them. I did make them all gaze to see themselves served so nobly
in plate, and a neat dinner, indeed, though but of seven dishes. Mighty
merry I was and made them all, and they mightily pleased. My Lord
Bruncker went away after dinner to the ticket-office, the rest staid,
only my Lady Batten home, her ague-fit coming on her at table. The rest
merry, and to cards, and then to sing and talk, and at night to sup, and
then to cards; and, last of all, to have a flaggon of ale and apples,
drunk out of a wood cupp,

     [A mazer or drinking-bowl turned out of some kind of wood, by
     preference of maple, and especially the spotted or speckled variety
     called “bird’s-eye maple” (see W. H. St. John Hope’s paper, “On the
     English Mediaeval Drinking-bowls called Mazers,” “Archaeologia,”
      vol.  50, pp. 129,93).]

as a Christmas draught, made all merry; and they full of admiration at
my plate, particularly my flaggons (which, indeed, are noble), and so
late home, all with great mirth and satisfaction to them, as I thought,
and to myself to see all I have and do so much outdo for neatness and
plenty anything done by any of them. They gone, I to bed, much pleased,
and do observe Mr. Lowther to be a pretty gentleman, and, I think, too
good for Peg; and, by the way, Peg Pen seems mightily to be kind to
me, and I believe by her father’s advice, who is also himself so; but I
believe not a little troubled to see my plenty, and was much troubled to
hear the song I sung, “The New Droll”--it touching him home. So to bed.