13th. Up, and with [Sir] W. Batten to the Duke of York to our usual
attendance, where I did fear my Lord Bruncker might move something in
revenge that might trouble me, but he did not, but contrarily had the
content to hear Sir G. Carteret fall foul on him in the Duke of York’s
bed chamber for his directing people with tickets and petitions to him,
bidding him mind his Controller’s place and not his, for if he did he
should be too hard for him, and made high words, which I was glad
of. Having done our usual business with the Duke of York, I away; and
meeting Mr. D. Gawden in the presence-chamber, he and I to talk; and
among other things he tells me, and I do find every where else, also,
that our masters do begin not to like of their councils in fitting out
no fleete, but only squadrons, and are finding out excuses for it; and,
among others, he tells me a Privy-Councillor did tell him that it was
said in Council that a fleete could not be set out this year, for want
of victuals, which gives him and me a great alarme, but me especially
for had it been so, I ought to have represented it; and therefore it
puts me in policy presently to prepare myself to answer this objection,
if ever it should come about, by drawing up a state of the Victualler’s
stores, which I will presently do. So to Westminster Hall, and there
staid and talked, and then to Sir G. Carteret’s, where I dined with the
ladies, he not at home, and very well used I am among them, so that I am
heartily ashamed that my wife hath not been there to see them; but she
shall very shortly. So home by water, and stepped into Michell’s, and
there did baiser my Betty, ‘que aegrotat’ a little. At home find Mr.
Holliard, and made him eat a bit of victuals. Here I find Mr. Greeten,
who teaches my wife on the flageolet, and I think she will come to
something on it. Mr. Holliard advises me to have my father come up to
town, for he doubts else in the country he will never find ease, for,
poor man, his grief is now grown so great upon him that he is never at
ease, so I will have him up at Easter. By and by by coach, set down Mr.
Holliard near his house at Hatton Garden and myself to Lord Treasurer’s,
and sent my wife to the New Exchange. I staid not here, but to
Westminster Hall, and thence to Martin’s, where he and she both within,
and with them the little widow that was once there with her when I was
there, that dissembled so well to be grieved at hearing a tune that her,
late husband liked, but there being so much company, I had no pleasure
here, and so away to the Hall again, and there met Doll Lane coming out,
and ‘par contrat did hazer bargain para aller to the cabaret de vin’,
called the Rose, and ‘ibi’ I staid two hours, ‘sed’ she did not ‘venir’,
‘lequel’ troubled me, and so away by coach and took up my wife, and away
home, and so to Sir W. Batten’s, where I am told that it is intended by
Mr. Carcasse to pray me to be godfather with Lord Bruncker to-morrow to
his child, which I suppose they tell me in mirth, but if he should
ask me I know not whether I should refuse it or no. Late at my office
preparing a speech against to-morrow morning, before the King, at my
Lord Treasurer’s, and the truth is it run in my head all night. So home
to supper and to bed. The Duke of Buckingham is concluded gone over sea,
and, it is thought, to France.