3rd. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes, [Sir] W. Batten, and [Sir] W. Pen in
the last man’s coach to St. James’s, and thence up to the Duke of York’s
chamber, which, as it is now fretted at the top, and the chimney-piece
made handsome, is one of the noblest and best-proportioned rooms that
ever, I think, I saw in my life, and when ready, into his closet and
did our business, where, among other things, we had a proposition of
Mr. Pierces, for being continued in pay, or something done for him, in
reward of his pains as Chyrurgeon-Generall; forasmuch as Troutbecke,
that was never a doctor before, hath got L200 a year settled on him for
nothing but that one voyage with the Duke of Albemarle. The Duke of York
and the whole company did shew most particular kindness to Mr. Pierce,
every body moving for him, and the Duke himself most, that he is likely
to be a very great man, I believe. Here also we had another mention of
Carcasses business, and we directed to bring in a report of our opinion
of his case, which vexes us that such a rogue shall make us so much
trouble. Thence I presently to the Excise Office, and there met the
Cofferer and [Sir] Stephen Fox by agreement, and agreed upon a method
for our future payments, and then we three to my Lord Treasurer, who
continues still very ill. I had taken my stone with me on purpose,
and Sir Philip Warwicke carried it in to him to see, but was not in
a condition to talk with me about it, poor man. So I with them to
Westminster by coach; the Cofferer telling us odd stories how he was
dealt with by the men of the Church at Westminster in taking a lease of
them at the King’s coming in, and particularly the devilish covetousness
of Dr. Busby. Sir Stephen Fox, in discourse, told him how he is selling
some land he hath, which yields him not above three per cent., if so
much, and turning it into money, which he can put out at ten per cent.;
and, as times go, if they be like to continue, it is the best way for
me to keep money going so, for aught I see. I to Westminster Hall, and
there took a turn with my old acquaintance Mr. Pechell, whose red nose
makes me ashamed to be seen with him, though otherwise a good-natured
man. So away, I not finding of Mr. Moore, with whom I should have met
and spoke about a letter I this day received from him from my Lord
Hinchingbroke, wherein he desires me to help him to L1900 to pay a bill
of exchange of his father’s, which troubles me much, but I will
find some way, if I can do it, but not to bring myself in bonds or
disbursements for it, whatever comes of it. So home to dinner, where my
wife hath ‘ceux la’ upon her and is very ill with them, and so forced
to go to bed, and I sat by her a good while, then down to my chamber and
made an end of Rycaut’s History of the Turks, which is a very good book.
Then to the office, and did some business, and then my wife being pretty
well, by coach to little Michell’s, and there saw my poor Betty and
her little child, which slept so soundly we could hardly wake it in an
hour’s time without hurting it, and they tell me what I did not know,
that a child (as this do) will hunt and hunt up and down with its mouth
if you touch the cheek of it with your finger’s end for a nipple, and
fit its mouth for sucking, but this hath not sucked yet, she having
no nipples. Here sat a while, and then my wife and I, it being a most
curious clear evening, after some rain to-day, took a most excellent
tour by coach to Bow, and there drank and back again, and so a little
at the office, and home to read a little, and to supper and bed mightily
refreshed with this evening’s tour, but troubled that it hath hindered
my doing some business which I would have done at the office. This day
the newes is come that the fleete of the Dutch, of about 20 ships, which
come upon our coasts upon design to have intercepted our colliers, but
by good luck failed, is gone to the Frith,--[Frith of Forth. See 5th of
this month.]--and there lies, perhaps to trouble the Scotch privateers,
which have galled them of late very much, it may be more than all our
last year’s fleete.