2nd. Up, and to the office, where sitting all the morning, and among
other things did agree upon a distribution of L30,000 and odd, which is
the only sum we hear of like to come out of all the Poll Bill for the
use of this office for buying of goods. I did herein some few courtesies
for particular friends I wished well to, and for the King’s service
also, and was therefore well pleased with what was done. Sir W. Pen this
day did bring an order from the Duke of York for our receiving from him
a small vessel for a fireship, and taking away a better of the King’s
for it, it being expressed for his great service to the King. This I am
glad of, not for his sake, but that it will give me a better ground, I
believe, to ask something for myself of this kind, which I was fearful
to begin. This do make Sir W. Pen the most kind to me that can be. I
suppose it is this, lest it should find any opposition from me, but
I will not oppose, but promote it. After dinner, with my wife, to
the King’s house to see “The Mayden Queene,” a new play of Dryden’s,
mightily commended for the regularity of it, and the strain and wit;
and, the truth is, there is a comical part done by Nell,

     [“Her skill increasing with her years, other poets sought to obtain
     recommendations of her wit and beauty to the success of their
     writings.   I have said that Dryden was one of the principal
     supporters of the King’s house, and ere long in one of his new plays
     a principal character was set apart for the popular comedian.  The
     drama was a tragi-comedy called ‘Secret Love, or the Maiden Queen,’
     and an additional interest was attached to its production from the
     king having suggested the plot to its author, and calling it ‘his
     play.’”--Cunningham’s Story of Nell Gwyn, ed: 1892, pp. 38,39.]

which is Florimell, that I never can hope ever to see the like done
again, by man or woman. The King and Duke of York were at the play.
But so great performance of a comical part was never, I believe, in the
world before as Nell do this, both as a mad girle, then most and best
of all when she comes in like a young gallant; and hath the notions and
carriage of a spark the most that ever I saw any man have. It makes
me, I confess, admire her. Thence home and to the office, where busy a
while, and then home to read the lives of Henry 5th and 6th, very fine,
in Speede, and to bed. This day I did pay a bill of L50 from my father,
being so much out of my own purse gone to pay my uncle Robert’s legacy
to my aunt Perkins’s child.