29th. Up, being visited very early by Creed newly come from
Hinchingbrooke, who went thither without my knowledge, and I believe
only to save his being taxed by the Poll Bill. I did give him no very
good countenance nor welcome, but took occasion to go forth and walked
(he with me) to St. Dunstan’s, and thence I to Sir W. Coventry’s, where
a good while with him, and I think he pretty kind, but that the nature
of our present condition affords not matter for either of us to be
pleased with any thing. We discoursed of Carcasse, whose Lord, he tells
me, do make complaints that his clerk should be singled out, and my Lord
Berkeley do take his part. So he advises we would sum up all we have
against him and lay it before the Duke of York; he condemned my Lord
Bruncker. Thence to Sir G. Carteret, and there talked a little while
about office business, and thence by coach home, in several places
paying my debts in order to my evening my accounts this month, and
thence by and by to White Hall again to Sir G. Carteret to dinner, where
very good company and discourse, and I think it my part to keep in there
now more than ordinary because of the probability of my Lord’s coming
soon home. Our Commissioners for the treaty set out this morning betimes
down the river. Here I hear that the Duke of Cambridge, the Duke of
York’s son, is very sick; and my Lord Treasurer very bad of the stone,
and hath been so some days. After dinner Sir G. Carteret and I alone in
his closet an hour or more talking of my Lord Sandwich’s coming home,
which, the peace being likely to be made here, he expects, both for my
Lord’s sake and his own (whose interest he wants) it will be best for
him to be at home, where he will be well received by the King; he is
sure of his service well accepted, though the business of Spain do fall
by this peace. He tells me my Lord Arlington hath done like a gentleman
by him in all things. He says, if my Lord [Sandwich] were here, he
were the fittest man to be Lord Treasurer of any man in England; and he
thinks it might be compassed; for he confesses that the King’s matters
do suffer through the inability of this man, who is likely to die, and
he will propound him to the King. It will remove him from his place at
sea, and the King will have a good place to bestow. He says to me, that
he could wish, when my Lord comes, that he would think fit to forbear
playing, as a thing below him, and which will lessen him, as it do my
Lord St. Albans, in the King’s esteem: and as a great secret tells me
that he hath made a match for my Lord Hinchingbroke to a daughter of my
Lord Burlington’s, where there is a great alliance, L10,000 portion; a
civil family, and relation to my Lord Chancellor, whose son hath married
one of the daughters; and that my Lord Chancellor do take it with
very great kindness, so that he do hold himself obliged by it. My Lord
Sandwich hath referred it to my Lord Crew, Sir G. Carteret, and Mr.
Montagu, to end it. My Lord Hinchingbroke and the lady know nothing yet
of it. It will, I think, be very happy. Very glad of this discourse, I
away mightily pleased with the confidence I have in this family, and
so away, took up my wife, who was at her mother’s, and so home, where I
settled to my chamber about my accounts, both Tangier and private, and
up at it till twelve at night, with good success, when news is brought
me that there is a great fire in Southwarke: so we up to the leads, and
then I and the boy down to the end of our, lane, and there saw it, it
seeming pretty great, but nothing to the fire of London, that it made me
think little of it. We could at that distance see an engine play--that
is, the water go out, it being moonlight. By and by, it begun to
slacken, and then I home and to bed.