19th. Up, and to the Office, where Commissioner Middleton first took
place at the Board as Surveyor of the Navy; and indeed I think will be
an excellent officer; I am sure much beyond what his predecessor was. At
noon, to avoid being forced to invite him to dinner, it being his first
day, and nobody inviting him, I did go to the ‘Change with Sir W. Pen in
his coach, who first went to Guildhall, whither I went with him, he to
speak with Sheriff Gawden--I only for company; and did here look up and
down this place, where I have not been before since the fire; and I see
that the city are got a pace on in the rebuilding of Guildhall. Thence
to the ‘Change, where I stayed very little, and so home to dinner, and
there find my wife mightily out of order with her teeth. At the office
all the afternoon, and at night by coach to Westminster, to the Hall,
where I met nobody, and do find that this evening the King by message
(which he never did before) hath passed several bills, among others
that for the Accounts, and for banishing my Lord Chancellor, and hath
adjourned the House to February; at which I am glad, hoping in this time
to get leisure to state my Tangier Accounts, and to prepare better for
the Parliament’s enquiries. Here I hear how the House of Lords, with
great severity, if not tyranny, have ordered poor Carr, who only erred
in the manner of the presenting his petition against my Lord Gerard, it
being first printed before it was presented; which was, it, seems, by
Colonel Sands’s going into the country, into whose hands he had put it:
the poor man is ordered to stand in the pillory two or three times, and
his eares cut, and be imprisoned I know not how long. But it is believed
that the Commons, when they meet, will not be well pleased with it; and
they have no reason, I think. Having only heard this from Mrs. Michell,
I away again home, and there to supper and to bed, my wife exceeding
ill in her face with the tooth ake, and now her face has become mightily
swelled that I am mightily troubled for it.