29th. Lay long talking with my wife about Balty, whom I do wish very
well to, and would be glad to advise him, for he is very sober and
willing to take all pains. Up and to Sir W. Batten, who I find has had
some words with Sir W. Pen about the employing of a cooper about our
prize wines, [Sir] W. Batten standing and indeed imposing upon us Mr.
Morrice, which I like not, nor do [Sir] W. Pen, and I confess the very
thoughts of what our goods will come to when we have them do discourage
me in going any further in the adventure. Then to the office till noon,
doing business, and then to the Exchange, and thence to the Sun Taverne
and dined with [Sir] W. Batten, [Sir] R. Ford, and the Swede’s Agent to
discourse of a composition about our prizes that are condemned, but did
do little, he standing upon high terms and we doing the like. I home,
and there find Balty and his wife got thither both by my wife for me to
give them good advice, for her to be with his father and mother all this
time of absence, for saving of money, and did plainly and like a friend
tell them my mind of the necessity of saving money, and that if I did
not find they did endeavour it, I should not think fit to trouble myself
for them, but I see she is utterly against being with his father and
mother, and he is fond of her, and I perceive the differences between
the old people and them are too great to be presently forgot, and so
he do propose that it will be cheaper for him to put her to board at
a place he is offered at Lee, and I, seeing that I am not like to be
troubled with the finding a place, and having given him so much
good advice, do leave them to stand and fall as they please, having
discharged myself as a friend, and not likely to be accountable for
her nor be troubled with her, if he should miscarry I mean, as to her
lodging, and so broke up. Then he and I to make a visit to [Sir] W. Pen,
who hath thought fit to show kindness to Balty in this business, indeed
though he be a false rogue, but it was he knew a thing easy to do.
Thence together to my shoemaker’s, cutler’s, tailor’s, and up and down
about my mourning, and in my way do observe the great streets in the
city are marked out with piles drove into the ground; and if ever it be
built in that form with so fair streets, it will be a noble sight. So to
the Council chamber, but staid not there, but to a periwigg-maker’s of
his acquaintance, and there bought two periwiggs, mighty fine; indeed,
too fine, I thought, for me; but he persuaded me, and I did buy them for
L4 10s. the two. Then to the Exchange and bought gloves, and so to the
Bull-Head Taverne, whither he brought my French gun; and one Truelocke,
the famous gunsmith, that is a mighty ingenious man, and he did take my
gun in pieces, and made me understand the secrets thereof and upon the
whole I do find it a very good piece of work, and truly wrought; but
for certain not a thing to be used much with safety: and he do find that
this very gun was never yet shot off: I was mighty satisfied with it and
him, and the sight of so much curiosity of this kind. Here he brought
also a haberdasher at my desire, and I bought a hat of him, and so away
and called away my wife from his house, and so home and to read, and
then to supper and to bed, my head full in behalf of Balty, who tells me
strange stories of his mother. Among others, how she, in his absence in
Ireland, did pawne all the things that he had got in his service under
Oliver, and run of her own accord, without her husband’s leave, into
Flanders, and that his purse, and 4s. a week which his father receives
of the French church, is all the subsistence his father and mother have,
and that about L20 a year maintains them; which, if it please God, I
will find one way or other to provide for them, to remove that scandal
away.