24th. Up, and to the office, where much business upon me by the coming
of people of all sorts about the dispatch of one business or other of
the fire-ships, or other ships to be set out now. This morning Greeting
come, and I with him at my flageolet. At noon dined at home with my wife
alone, and then in the afternoon all the day at my office. Troubled a
little at a letter from my father, which tells me of an idle companion,
one Coleman, who went down with him and my wife in the coach, and come
up again with my wife, a pensioner of the King’s Guard, and one that
my wife, indeed, made the feast for on Saturday last, though he did
not come; but if he knows nothing of our money I will prevent any other
inconvenience. In the evening comes Mr. Povy about business; and he and
I to walk in the garden an hour or two, and to talk of State matters.
He tells me his opinion that it is out of possibility for us to escape
being undone, there being nothing in our power to do that is necessary
for the saving us: a lazy Prince, no Council, no money, no reputation at
home or abroad. He says that to this day the King do follow the women as
much as ever he did; that the Duke of York hath not got Mrs. Middleton,
as I was told the other day: but says that he wants not her, for he hath
others, and hath always had, and that he [Povy] hath known them brought
through the Matted Gallery at White Hall into his [the Duke’s] closet;
nay, he hath come out of his wife’s bed, and gone to others laid in
bed for him: that Mr. Bruncker is not the only pimp, but that the whole
family is of the same strain, and will do anything to please him: that,
besides the death of the two Princes lately, the family is in horrible
disorder by being in debt by spending above L60,000 per. annum, when he
hath not L40,000: that the Duchesse is not only the proudest woman
in the world, but the most expensefull; and that the Duke of York’s
marriage with her hath undone the kingdom, by making the Chancellor so
great above reach, who otherwise would have been but an ordinary man, to
have been dealt with by other people; and he would have been careful of
managing things well, for fear of being called to account; whereas, now
he is secure, and hath let things run to rack, as they now appear. That
at a certain time Mr. Povy did carry him an account of the state of the
Duke of York’s estate, showing in faithfullness how he spent more than
his estate would bear, by above L20,000 per annum, and asked my Lord’s
opinion of it; to which he answered that no man that loved the King or
kingdom durst own the writing of that paper; at which Povy was startled,
and reckoned himself undone for this good service, and found it
necessary then to show it to the Duke of York’s Commissioners; who read,
examined, and approved of it, so as to cause it to be put into form, and
signed it, and gave it the Duke. Now the end of the Chancellor was, for
fear that his daughter’s ill housewifery should be condemned. He [Povy]
tells me that the other day, upon this ill newes of the Dutch being upon
us, White Hall was shut up, and the Council called and sat close; and,
by the way, he do assure me, from the mouth of some Privy-councillors,
that at this day the Privy-council in general do know no more what the
state of the kingdom as to peace and war is, than he or I; nor knows who
manages it, nor upon whom it depends; and there my Lord Chancellor did
make a speech to them, saying that they knew well that he was no friend
to the war from the beginning, and therefore had concerned himself
little in, nor could say much to it; and a great deal of that kind, to
discharge himself of the fault of the war. Upon which my Lord Anglesey
rose up and told his Majesty that he thought their coming now together
was not to enquire who was, or was not, the cause of the war, but to
enquire what was, or could be, done in the business of making a peace,
and in whose hands that was, and where it was stopped or forwarded; and
went on very highly to have all made open to them: and, by the way, I
remember that Captain Cocke did the other day tell me that this Lord
Anglesey hath said, within few days, that he would willingly give
L10,000 of his estate that he was well secured of the rest, such
apprehensions he hath of the sequel of things, as giving all over for
lost. He tells me, speaking of the horrid effeminacy of the King, that
the King hath taken ten times more care and pains in making friends
between my Lady Castlemayne and Mrs. Stewart, when they have fallen out,
than ever he did to save his kingdom; nay, that upon any falling out
between my Lady Castlemayne’s nurse and her woman, my Lady hath often
said she would make the King to make them friends, and they would be
friends and be quiet; which the King hath been fain to do: that the King
is, at this day, every night in Hyde Park with the Duchesse of Monmouth,
or with my Lady Castlemaine: that he [Povy] is concerned of late by my
Lord Arlington in the looking after some buildings that he is about in
Norfolke, where my Lord is laying out a great deal of money; and that
he, Mr. Povy, considering the unsafeness of laying out money at such a
time as this, and, besides, the enviousness of the particular county,
as well as all the kingdom, to find him building and employing workmen,
while all the ordinary people of the country are carried down to the
seasides for securing the land, he thought it becoming him to go to my
Lord Arlington (Sir Thomas Clifford by), and give it as his advice to
hold his hands a little; but my Lord would not, but would have him go
on, and so Sir Thomas Clifford advised also, which one would think, if
he were a statesman worth a fart should be a sign of his foreseeing that
all shall do well. But I do forbear concluding any such thing from them.
He tells me that there is not so great confidence between any two men
of power in the nation at this day, that he knows of, as between my Lord
Arlington and Sir Thomas Clifford; and that it arises by accident only,
there being no relation nor acquaintance between them, but only Sir
Thomas Clifford’s coming to him, and applying himself to him for
favours, when he come first up to town to be a Parliament-man. He tells
me that he do not think there is anything in the world for us possibly
to be saved by but the King of France’s generousnesse to stand by us
against the Dutch, and getting us a tolerable peace, it may be, upon our
giving him Tangier and the islands he hath taken, and other things
he shall please to ask. He confirms me in the several grounds I have
conceived of fearing that we shall shortly fall into mutinys and
outrages among ourselves, and that therefore he, as a Treasurer, and
therefore much more myself, I say, as being not only a Treasurer but an
officer of the Navy, on whom, for all the world knows, the faults of all
our evils are to be laid, do fear to be seized on by some rude hands as
having money to answer for, which will make me the more desirous to get
off of this Treasurership as soon as I can, as I had before in my mind
resolved. Having done all this discourse, and concluded the kingdom in
a desperate condition, we parted; and I to my wife, with whom was Mercer
and Betty Michell, poor woman, come with her husband to see us after
the death of her little girle. We sat in the garden together a while,
it being night, and then Mercer and I a song or two, and then in (the
Michell’s home), my wife, Mercer, and I to supper, and then parted and
to bed.