29th. Up, having had many ugly dreams to-night of my father and my
sister and mother’s coming to us, and meeting my wife and me at the gate
of the office going out, they all in laced suits, and come, they told
me, to be with me this May day. My mother told me she lacked a pair of
gloves, and I remembered a pair of my wife’s in my chamber, and resolved
she should have them, but then recollected how my mother come to be here
when I was in mourning for her, and so thinking it to be a mistake in
our thinking her all this while dead, I did contrive that it should
be said to any that enquired that it was my mother-in-law, my wife’s
mother, that was dead, and we in mourning for. This dream troubled me
and I waked.... These dreams did trouble me mightily all night. Up, and
by coach to St. James’s, and there find Sir W. Coventry and Sir W. Pen
above stairs, and then we to discourse about making up our accounts
against the Parliament; and Sir W. Coventry did give us the best advice
he could for us to provide for our own justification, believing, as
everybody do, that they will fall heavily upon us all, though he lay all
upon want of money, only a little, he says (if the Parliament be in any
temper), may be laid upon themselves for not providing money sooner,
they being expressly and industriously warned thereof by him, he says,
even to the troubling them, that some of them did afterwards tell him
that he had frighted them. He says he do prepare to justify himself,
and that he hears that my Lord Chancellor, my Lord Arlington, the Vice
Chamberlain and himself are reported all up and down the Coffee houses
to be the four sacrifices that must be made to atone the people. Then we
to talk of the loss of all affection and obedience, now in the seamen,
so that all power is lost. He told us that he do concur in thinking that
want of money do do the most of it, but that that is not all, but the
having of gentlemen Captains, who discourage all Tarpaulins, and have
given out that they would in a little time bring it to that pass that a
Tarpaulin should not dare to aspire to more than to be a Boatswain or
a gunner. That this makes the Sea Captains to lose their own good
affections to the service, and to instil it into the seamen also, and
that the seamen do see it themselves and resent it; and tells us that
it is notorious, even to his bearing of great ill will at Court, that he
hath been the opposer of gentlemen Captains; and Sir W. Pen did put in,
and said that he was esteemed to have been the man that did instil it
into Sir W. Coventry, which Sir W. Coventry did owne also, and says that
he hath always told the Gentlemen Captains his opinion of them, and
that himself who had now served to the business of the sea 6 or 7 years
should know a little, and as much as them that had never almost been at
sea, and that yet he found himself fitter to be a Bishop or Pope than
to be a Sea-Commander, and so indeed he is. I begun to tell him of the
experience I had of the great brags made by Sir F. Hollis the other day,
and the little proof either of the command or interest he had in his
men, which Sir W. Pen seconded by saying Sir Fr. Hollis had told him
that there was not a pilot to be got the other day for his fire-ships,
and so was forced to carry them down himself, which Sir W. Coventry
says, in my conscience, he knows no more to do and understand the River
no more than he do Tiber or Ganges. Thence I away with Sir W. Pen to
White Hall, to the Treasury Chamber, but to no purpose, and so by coach
home, and there to my office to business, and then home to dinner,
and to pipe with my wife, and so to the office again, having taken a
resolution to take a turn to Chatham to-morrow, indeed to do business of
the King’s, but also to give myself the satisfaction of seeing the place
after the Dutch have been here. I have sent to and got Creed to go with
me by coach betimes to-morrow morning. After having done my business at
the office I home, and there I found Coleman come again to my house,
and with my wife in our great chamber, which vexed me, there being a bed
therein. I staid there awhile, and then to my study vexed, showing no
civility to the man. But he comes on a compliment to receive my wife’s
commands into the country, whither he is going, and it being Saturday
my wife told me there was no other room for her to bring him in, and so
much is truth. But I staid vexed in my closet till by and by my cozen
Thomas Pepys, of Hatcham, come to see me, and he up to my closet, and
there sat talking an hour or two of the sad state of the times, whereof
we did talk very freely, and he thinks nothing but a union of religious
interests will ever settle us; and I do think that, and the Parliament’s
taking the whole management of things into their hands, and severe
inquisitions into our miscarriages; will help us. After we had bewailed
ourselves and the kingdom very freely one to another (wherein I do blame
myself for my freedom of speech to anybody), he gone, and Coleman gone
also before, I to the office, whither Creed come by my desire, and
he and I to my wife, to whom I now propose the going to Chatham, who,
mightily pleased with it, sent for Mercer to go with her, but she could
not go, having friends at home, which vexed my wife and me; and the poor
wretch would have had anybody else to have gone, but I would like nobody
else, so was contented to stay at home, on condition to go to Ispsum
next Sunday, which I will do, and so I to the office to dispatch my
business, and then home to supper with Creed, and then Creed and I
together to bed, very pleasant in discourse. This day talking with Sir
W. Batten, he did give me an account how ill the King and Duke of York
was advised to send orders for our frigates and fire-ships to come from
Gravesend, soon as ever news come of the Dutch being returned into the
river, wherein no seamen, he believes, was advised with; for, says he,
we might have done just as Warwicke did, when he, W. Batten; come with
the King and the like fleete, in the late wars, into the river: for
Warwicke did not run away from them, but sailed before them when they
sailed, and come to anchor when they come to anchor, and always kept in
a small distance from them: so as to be able to take any opportunity
of any of their ships running aground, or change of wind, or any thing
else, to his advantage. So might we have done with our fire-ships, and
we have lost an opportunity of taking or burning a good ship of their’s,
which was run aground about Holehaven, I think he said, with the wind
so as their ships could not get her away; but we might have done what we
would with her, and, it may be, done them mischief, too, with the wind.
This seems very probable, and I believe was not considered.