13th. Up, and down to the Old Swan, and so to Westminster; where I find
the House sitting, and in a mighty heat about Commissioner Pett, that
they would have him impeached, though the Committee have yet brought in
but part of their Report: and this heat of the House is much heightened
by Sir Thomas Clifford telling them, that he was the man that did, out
of his own purse, employ people at the out-ports to prevent the King of
Scots to escape after the battle of Worcester. The House was in a great
heat all this day about it; and at last it was carried, however, that it
should be referred back to the Committee to make further enquiry. I here
spoke with Roger Pepys, who sent for me, and it was to tell me that
the Committee is mighty full of the business of buying and selling of
tickets, and to caution me against such an enquiry (wherein I am very
safe), and that they have already found out Sir Richard Ford’s son to
have had a hand in it, which they take to be the same as if the
father had done it, and I do believe the father may be as likely to be
concerned in it as his son. But I perceive by him they are resolved to
find out the bottom of the business if it be possible. By and by I
met with Mr. Wren, who tells me that the Duke of York is in as good
condition as is possible for a man, in his condition of the smallpox.
He, I perceive, is mightily concerned in the business of my Lord
Chancellor, the impeachment against whom is gone up to the House of
Lords; and great differences there are in the Lords’ House about it, and
the Lords are very high one against another. Thence home to dinner, and
as soon as dinner done I and my wife and Willet to the Duke of York’s,
house, and there saw the Tempest again, which is very pleasant, and full
of so good variety that I cannot be more pleased almost in a comedy,
only the seamen’s part a little too tedious. Thence home, and there to
my chamber, and do begin anew to bind myself to keep my old vows, and
among the rest not to see a play till Christmas but once in every other
week, and have laid aside L10, which is to be lost to the poor, if I do.
This I hope in God will bind me, for I do find myself mightily wronged
in my reputation, and indeed in my purse and business, by my late
following of my pleasure for so long time as I have done. So to supper
and then to bed. This day Mr. Chichly told me, with a seeming trouble,
that the House have stopped his son Jack (Sir John) his going to France,
that he may be a witness against my Lord Sandwich: which do trouble me,
though he can, I think, say little.