31st. Up, without words to my wife, or few, and those not angry, and so
to White Hall, and there waited a long time, while the Duke of York
was with the King in the Caball, and there I and Creed stayed talking
without, in the Vane-Room, and I perceive all people’s expectation is,
what will be the issue of this great business of putting these great
Lords out of the council and power, the quarrel, I perceive, being
only their standing against the will of the King in the business of the
Chancellor. Anon the Duke of York comes out, and then to a committee of
Tangier, where my Lord Middleton did come to-day, and seems to me but a
dull, heavy man; but he is a great soldier, and stout, and a needy Lord,
which will still keep that poor garrison from ever coming to be worth
anything to the King. Here, after a short meeting, we broke up, and I
home to the office, where they are sitting, and so I to them, and having
done our business rose, and I home to dinner with my people, and there
dined with me my uncle Thomas, with a mourning hat-band on, for his
daughter Mary, and here I and my people did discourse of the Act for the
accounts,

     [“An Act for taking the Accompts of the several sums of money therein
     menconed, 19 and 20 Car.  II., c.  I.  The commissioners were
     empowered to call before them all Treasurers, Receivers,
     Paymasters, Principal Officers and Commissioners of the Navy and
     Ordnance respectively, Pursers, Mustermasters and Clerks of the
     Cheque, Accomptants, and all Officers and Keepers of his Majesties
     Stores and Provisions for Warr as well for Land as Sea, and all
     other persons whatsoever imployed in the management of the said Warr
     or requisite for the discovery of any frauds relating thereunto,”
      &c., &c.  (“Statutes of the Realm,” vol. v., pp.  624,627).]

which do give the greatest power to these people, as they report that
have read it (I having not yet read it, and indeed its nature is such as
I have no mind to go about to read it, for fear of meeting matter in it
to trouble me), that ever was given to any subjects, and too much also.
After dinner with my wife and girl to Unthanke’s, and there left her,
and I to Westminster, and there to Mrs. Martin’s, and did hazer con elle
what I desired, and there did drink with her, and find fault with her
husband’s wearing of too fine clothes, by which I perceive he will be a
beggar, and so after a little talking I away and took up my wife again,
and so home and to the office, where Captain Perryman did give me
an account, walking in the garden, how the seamen of England are
discouraged by want of money (or otherwise by being, as he says, but I
think without cause, by their being underrated) so far as that he thinks
the greatest part are gone abroad or going, and says that it is known
that there are Irish in the town, up and down, that do labour to entice
the seamen out of the nation by giving them L3 in hand, and promise
of 40s. per month, to go into the King of France’s service, which is a
mighty shame, but yet I believe is true. I did advise with him about my
little vessel, “The Maybolt,” which he says will be best for me to sell,
though my employing her to Newcastle this winter, and the next spring,
for coles, will be a gainful trade, but yet make me great trouble, but I
will think of it, and so to my office, ended my letters, and so home to
supper and to bed, good friends with my wife. Thus ends the year, with
great happiness to myself and family as to health and good condition in
the world, blessed be God for it! only with great trouble to my mind
in reference to the publick, there being little hopes left but that the
whole nation must in a very little time be lost, either by troubles at
home, the Parliament being dissatisfied, and the King led into unsettled
councils by some about him, himself considering little, and divisions
growing between the King and Duke of York; or else by foreign invasion,
to which we must submit if any, at this bad point of time, should come
upon us, which the King of France is well able to do. These thoughts,
and some cares upon me, concerning my standing in this Office when the
Committee of Parliament shall come to examine our Navy matters, which
they will now shortly do. I pray God they may do the kingdom service
therein, as they will have sufficient opportunity of doing it!

     ETEXT EDITOR’S BOOKMARKS, DIARY OF SAMUEL PEPYS, 1667 N.S., COMPLETE: