4th. Up, and, in vain expecting Sir R. Ford’s calling on me, I took
coach and to the Sessions-house, where I have a mind to hear Bazill
Fielding’s case--[See May 9th, 1667]--tried; and so got up to the
Bench, my Lord Chief-Justice Keeling being Judge. Here I stood bare, not
challenging, though I might well enough, to be covered. But here were
several fine trials; among others, several brought in for making it
their trade to set houses on fire merely to get plunder; and all proved
by the two little boys spoken of yesterday by Sir R. Ford, who did give
so good account of particulars that I never heard children in my life.
And I confess, though I was unsatisfied with the force given to such
little boys, to take away men’s lives, yet, when I was told that my Lord
Chief-Justice did declare that there was no law against taking the oath
of children above twelve years old, and then heard from Sir R. Ford the
good account which the boys had given of their understanding the nature
and consequence of an oath, and now my own observation of the sobriety
and readiness of their answers, further than of any man of any rank that
come to give witness this day, though some men of years and learning, I
was a little amazed, and fully satisfied that they ought to have as
much credit as the rest. They proved against several, their consulting
several times at a bawdy-house in Moore-Fields, called the Russia House,
among many other rogueries, of setting houses on fire, that they might
gather the goods that were flung into the streets; and it is worth
considering how unsafe it is to have children play up and down this lewd
town. For these two boys, one is my Lady Montagu’s (I know not what
Lady Montagu) son, and the other of good condition, were playing in
Moore-Fields, and one rogue, Gabriel Holmes, did come to them and
teach them to drink, and then to bring him plate and clothes from their
fathers’ houses, and carry him into their houses, and leaving open the
doors for him, and at last were made of their conspiracy, and were at
the very burning of this house in Aldersgate Street, on Easter Sunday
at night last, and did gather up goods, as they had resolved before and
this Gabriel Holmes did advise to have had two houses set on fire, one
after another, that, while they were quenching of one, they might be
burning another. And it is pretty that G. Holmes did tell his fellows,
and these boys swore it, that he did set fire to a box of linen in the
Sheriffe, Sir Joseph Shelden’s’ house, while he was attending the fire
in Aldersgate Street, and the Sheriffe himself said that there was
a fire in his house, in a box of linen, at the same time, but cannot
conceive how this fellow should do it. The boys did swear against one
of them, that he had made it his part to pull the plug out of the engine
while it was a-playing; and it really was so. And goods they did carry
away, and the manner of the setting the house on fire was, that Holmes
did get to a cockpit; where, it seems, there was a publick cockpit,
and set fire to the straw in it, and hath a fire-ball at the end of the
straw, which did take fire, and so it prevailed, and burned the house;
and, among other things they carried away, he took six of the cocks that
were at the cockpit; and afterwards the boys told us how they had one
dressed, by the same token it was so hard they could not eat it. But
that which was most remarkable was the impudence of this Holmes, who
hath been arraigned often, and still got away; and on this business was
taken and broke loose just at Newgate Gate; and was last night luckily
taken about Bow, who got loose, and run into the river, and hid himself
in the rushes; and they pursued him with a dog, and the dog got him and
held him till he was taken. But the impudence of this fellow was such,
that he denied he ever saw the boys before, or ever knew the Russia
House, or that the people knew him; and by and by the mistress of the
Russia House was called in, being indicted, at the same time, about
another thing; and she denied that the fellow was of her acquaintance,
when it was pretty to see how the little boys did presently fall upon
her, and ask her how she durst say so, when she was always with them
when they met at her house, and particularly when she come in in her
smock before a dozen of them, at which the Court laughed, and put the
woman away. Well, this fellow Holmes was found guilty of the act of
burning the house, and other things, that he stood indicted for. And
then there were other good cases, as of a woman that come to serve a
gentlewoman, and in three days run away, betimes in the morning, with a
great deal of plate and rings, and other good things. It was time very
well spent to be here. Here I saw how favourable the judge was to a
young gentleman that struck one of the officers, for not making him
room: told him he had endangered the loss of his hand, but that he hoped
he had not struck him, and would suppose that he had not struck him.
About that the Court rose, and I to dinner with my Lord Mayor and
Sheriffs; where a good dinner and good discourse; the judge being there.
There was also tried this morning Fielding, which I thought had been
Bazilll--but it proved the other, and Bazill was killed; that killed
his brother, who was found guilty of murder, and nobody pitied him.
The judge seems to be a worthy man, and able: and do intend, for these
rogues that burned this house to be hung in some conspicuous place in
the town, for an example. After dinner to the Court again, where I heard
some more causes, but with so much trouble because of the hot weather
that I had no pleasure in it. Anon the Court rose, and I walked to Fleet
streete for my belt at the beltmaker’s, and so home and to the office,
wrote some letters, and then home to supper and to bed.