6th. Up, lying a little long in bed, and by water to White Hall, and
there find the Duke of York gone out, he being in haste to go to the
Parliament, and so all my Brethren were gone to the office too. So I to
Sir Ph. Warwicke’s about my Tangier business, and then to Westminster
Hall, and walked up and down, and hear that the Prince do still rest
well by day and night, and out of pain; so as great hopes are conceived
of him: though I did meet Dr. Clerke and Mr. Pierce, and they do say
they believe he will not recover it, they supposing that his whole head
within is eaten by this corruption, which appeared in this piece of the
inner table. Up to the Parliament door, and there discoursed with Roger
Pepys, who goes out of town this week, the Parliament rising this week
also. So down to the Hall and there spied Betty Michell, and so I sent
for burnt wine to Mrs. Michell’s, and there did drink with the two
mothers, and by that means with Betty, poor girle, whom I love with all
my heart. And God forgive me, it did make me stay longer and hover all
the morning up and down the Hall to ‘busquer occasions para ambulare con
elle. But ego ne pouvoir’. So home by water and to dinner, and then to
the office, where we sat upon Denis Gawden’s accounts, and before night
I rose and by water to White Hall, to attend the Council; but they sat
not to-day. So to Sir W. Coventry’s chamber, and find him within, and
with a letter from the Downes in his hands, telling the loss of the St.
Patricke coming from Harwich in her way to Portsmouth; and would needs
chase two ships (she having the Malago fire-ship in company) which
from English colours put up Dutch, and he would clap on board the
Vice-Admirall; and after long dispute the Admirall comes on the other
side of him, and both together took him. Our fire-ship (Seely) not
coming in to fire all three, but come away, leaving her in their
possession, and carried away by them: a ship built at Bristoll the last
year, of fifty guns and upwards, and a most excellent good ship. This
made him very melancholy. I to talk of our wants of money, but I do find
that he is not pleased with that discourse, but grieves to hear it, and
do seem to think that Sir G. Carteret do not mind the getting of money
with the same good cheer that he did heretofore, nor do I think he
hath the same reason. Thence to Westminster Hall, thinking to see Betty
Michell, she staying there all night, and had hopes to get her out
alone, but missed, and so away by coach home, and to Sir W. Batten’s, to
tell him my bad news, and then to the office, and home to supper, where
Mrs. Hewer was, and after supper and she gone, W. Hewer talking with me
very late of the ill manner of Sir G. Carteret’s accounts being kept,
and in what a sad condition he would be if either Fenn or Wayth should
break or die, and am resolved to take some time to tell Sir G. Carteret
or my Lady of it, I do love them so well and their family. So to bed, my
pain pretty well gone.