11th. Up, and with my cold still upon me and hoarseness, but I was
forced to rise and to the office, where all the morning busy, and among
other things Sir W. Warren come to me, to whom of late I have been very
strange, partly from my indifference how more than heretofore to get
money, but most from my finding that he is become great with my Lord
Bruncker, and so I dare not trust him as I used to do, for I will not be
inward with him that is open to another. By and by comes Sir H. Cholmly
to me about Tangier business, and then talking of news he tells me how
yesterday the King did publiquely talk of the King of France’s dealing
with all the Princes of Christendome. As to the States of Holland, he
[the King of France] hath advised them, on good grounds, to refuse to
treat with us at the Hague, because of having opportunity of spies, by
reason of our interest in the House of Orange; and then, it being a town
in one particular province, it would not be fit to have it, but in a
town wherein the provinces have equal interest, as at Mastricht, and
other places named. That he advises them to offer no terms, nor accept
of any, without his privity and consent, according to agreement; and
tells them, if not so, he hath in his power to be even with them, the
King of England being come to offer him any terms he pleases; and that
my Lord St. Albans is now at Paris, Plenipotentiary, to make what peace
he pleases; and so he can make it, and exclude them, the Dutch, if he
sees fit. A copy of this letter of the King of France’s the Spanish
Ambassador here gets, and comes and tells all to our King; which our
King denies, and says the King of France only uses his power of saying
anything. At the same time, the King of France writes to the Emperor,
that he is resolved to do all things to express affection to the
Emperor, having it now in his power to make what peace he pleases
between the King of England and him, and the States of the United
Provinces; and, therefore, that he would not have him to concern himself
in a friendship with us; and assures him that, on that regard, he will
not offer anything to his disturbance, in his interest in Flanders, or
elsewhere. He writes, at the same time, to Spayne, to tell him that he
wonders to hear of a league almost ended between the Crown of Spayne and
England, by my Lord Sandwich, and all without his privity, while he was
making a peace upon what terms he pleased with England: that he is a
great lover of the Crown of Spayne, and would take the King and his
affairs, during his minority, into his protection, nor would offer
to set his foot in Flanders, or any where else, to disturb him; and,
therefore, would not have him to trouble himself to make peace with any
body; only he hath a desire to offer an exchange, which he thinks may be
of moment to both sides: that is, that he [France] will enstate the King
of Spayne in the kingdom of Portugall, and he and the Dutch will put him
into possession of Lisbon; and, that being done, he [France] may have
Flanders: and this, they say; do mightily take in Spayne, which is
sensible of the fruitless expence Flanders, so far off, gives them; and
how much better it would be for them to be master of Portugall; and the
King of France offers, for security herein, that the King of England
shall be bond for him, and that he will countersecure the King of
England with Amsterdam; and, it seems, hath assured our King, that if
he will make a league with him, he will make a peace exclusive to the
Hollander. These things are almost romantique, but yet true, as Sir H.
Cholmly tells me the King himself did relate it all yesterday; and it
seems as if the King of France did think other princes fit for nothing
but to make sport for him: but simple princes they are, that are forced
to suffer this from him. So at noon with Sir W. Pen by coach to the
Sun in Leadenhall Streete, where Sir R. Ford, Sir W. Batten, and
Commissioner Taylor (whose feast it was) were, and we dined and had a
very good dinner. Among other discourses Sir R. Ford did tell me that he
do verily believe that the city will in few years be built again in all
the greatest streets, and answered the objections I did give to it.
Here we had the proclamation this day come out against the Duke of
Buckingham, commanding him to come in to one of the Secretaries, or to
the Lieutenant of the Tower. A silly, vain man to bring himself to this:
and there be many hard circumstances in the proclamation of the causes
of this proceeding of the King’s, which speak great displeasure of the
King’s, and crimes of his. Then to discourse of the business of the day,
that is, to see Commissioner Taylor’s accounts for his ship he built,
The Loyall London, and it is pretty to see how dully this old fellow
makes his demands, and yet plaguy wise sayings will come from the man
sometimes, and also how Sir R. Ford and [Sir] W. Batten did with seeming
reliance advise him what to do, and how to come prepared to answer
objections to the Common Council. Thence away to the office, where late
busy, and then home to supper, mightily pleased with my wife’s trill,
and so to bed. This night Mr. Carcasse did come to me again to desire
favour, and that I would mediate that he might be restored, but I did
give him no kind answer at all, but was very angry, and I confess a good
deal of it from my Lord Bruncker’s simplicity and passion.