19th. To the office, and thence before noon I, by the Board’s direction,
to the Parliament House to speak with Sir R. Brookes about the meaning
of an order come to us this day to bring all the books of the office to
the Committee. I find by him that it is only about the business of an
order of ours for paying off the ships by ticket, which they think I on
behalf of my Lord Bruncker do suppress, which vexes me, and more at its
occasioning the bringing them our books. So home and to dinner, where
Mr. Shepley with me, newly come out of the country, but I was at little
liberty to talk to him, but after dinner with two contracts to the
Committee, with Lord Bruncker and Sir T. Harvy, and there did deliver
them, and promised at their command more, but much against my will.
And here Sir R. Brookes did take me alone, and pray me to prevent their
trouble, by discovering the order he would have. I told him I would
suppress none, nor could, but this did not satisfy him, and so we
parted, I vexed that I should bring on myself this suspicion. Here I
did stand by unseen, and did hear their impertinent yet malicious
examinations of some rogues about the business of Bergen, wherein they
would wind in something against my Lord Sandwich (it was plain by their
manner of examining, as Sir Thomas Crew did afterwards observe to me,
who was there), but all amounted to little I think. But here Sir Thomas
Crew and W. Hewer, who was there also, did tell me that they did hear
Captain Downing give a cruel testimony against my Lord Bruncker, for his
neglect, and doing nothing, in the time of straits at Chatham, when he
was spoke to, and did tell the Committee that he, Downing, did presently
after, in Lord Bruncker’s hearing, tell the Duke of Albemarle, that if
he might advise the King, he should hang both my Lord Bruncker and Pett.
This is very hard. Thence with W. Hewer and our messenger, Marlow, home
by coach, and so late at letters, and then home to supper, and my wife
to read and then to bed. This night I wrote to my father, in answer to
a new match which is proposed (the executor of Ensum, my sister’s former
servant) for my sister, that I will continue my mind of giving her L500,
if he likes of the match. My father did also this week, by Shepley,
return me up a ‘guinny, which, it seems, upon searching the ground, they
have found since I was there. I was told this day that Lory Hide,

     [Laurence Hyde, second son of Lord Chancellor Clarendon (1614-1711).
     He held many important offices, and was First Lord of the Treasury,