16th. Up, and at home most of the morning with Sir H. Cholmly, about
some accounts of his; and for news he tells me that the Commons and
Lords have concurred, and delivered the King their thanks, among other
things, for his removal of the Chancellor; who took their thanks very
well, and, among other things, promised them, in these words, never,
in any degree, to entertain the Chancellor any employment again. And he
tells me that it is very true, he hath it from one that was by, that the
King did, give the Duke of York a sound reprimand; told him that he had
lived with him with more kindness than ever any brother King lived with
a brother, and that he lived as much like a monarch as himself, but
advised him not to cross him in his designs about the Chancellor; in
which the Duke of York do very wisely acquiesce, and will be quiet as
the King bade him, but presently commands all his friends to be silent
in the business of the Chancellor, and they were so: but that the
Chancellor hath done all that is possible to provoke the King, and to
bring himself to lose his head by enraging of people. He gone, I to the
office, busy all the morning. At noon to Broad Street to Sir G. Carteret
and Lord Bruncker, and there dined with them, and thence after dinner
with Bruncker to White Hall, where the Duke of York is now newly come
for this winter, and there did our usual business, which is but little,
and so I away to the Duke of York’s house, thinking as we appointed, to
meet my wife there, but she was not; and more, I was vexed to see Young
(who is but a bad actor at best) act Macbeth in the room of Betterton,
who, poor man! is sick: but, Lord! what a prejudice it wrought in me
against the whole play, and everybody else agreed in disliking this
fellow. Thence home, and there find my wife gone home; because of this
fellow’s acting of the part, she went out of the house again. There busy
at my chamber with Mr. Yeabsly, and then with Mr. Lewes, about public
business late, and so to supper and to bed.