5th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning doing business, and
then home to dinner. Heard this morning that the Prince is much better,
and hath good rest. All the talk is that my Lord Sandwich hath perfected
the peace with Spayne, which is very good, if true. Sir H. Cholmly was
with me this morning, and told me of my Lord Bellasses’s base dealings
with him by getting him to give him great gratuities to near L2000
for his friendship in the business of the Mole, and hath been lately
underhand endeavouring to bring another man into his place as Governor,
so as to receive his money of Sir H. Cholmly for nothing. Dined at home,
and after dinner come Mrs. Daniel and her sister and staid and talked a
little, and then I to the office, and after setting my things in order
at the office I abroad with my wife and little Betty Michell, and took
them against my vowes, but I will make good my forfeit, to the King’s
house, to show them a play, “The Chances.” A good play I find it, and
the actors most good in it; and pretty to hear Knipp sing in the play
very properly, “All night I weepe;” and sung it admirably. The
whole play pleases me well: and most of all, the sight of many fine
ladies--among others, my Lady Castlemayne and Mrs. Middleton: the latter
of the two hath also a very excellent face and body, I think. Thence
by coach to the New Exchange, and there laid out money, and I did give
Betty Michell two pair of gloves and a dressing-box; and so home in the
dark, over the ruins, with a link. I was troubled with my pain, having
got a bruise on my right testicle, I know not how. But this I did make
good use of to make my wife shift sides with me, and I did come to sit
‘avec’ Betty Michell, and there had her ‘main’, which ‘elle’ did give me
very frankly now, and did hazer whatever I ‘voudrais avec la’, which did
‘plaisir’ me ‘grandement’, and so set her at home with my mind mighty
glad of what I have prevailed for so far; and so home, and to the
office, and did my business there, and then home to supper, and after to
set some things right in my chamber, and so to bed. This morning,
before I went to the office, there come to me Mr. Young and Whistler,
flaggmakers, and with mighty earnestness did present me with, and press
me to take a box, wherein I could not guess there was less than L100 in
gold: but I do wholly refuse it, and did not at last take it. The truth
is, not thinking them safe men to receive such a gratuity from, nor
knowing any considerable courtesy that ever I did do them, but desirous
to keep myself free from their reports, and to have it in my power to
say I had refused their offer.