20th (Lord’s day). Up betimes and down to the Old Swan, there called on
Michell and his wife, which in her night linen appeared as pretty almost
as ever to my thinking I saw woman. Here I drank some burnt brandy. They
shewed me their house, which, poor people, they have built, and is very
pretty. I invited them to dine with me, and so away to White Hall to Sir
W. Coventry, with whom I have not been alone a good while, and very kind
he is, and tells me how the business is now ordered by order of council
for my Lord Bruncker to assist Sir J. Minnes in all matters of accounts
relating to the Treasurer, and Sir W. Pen in all matters relating to
the victuallers’ and pursers’ accounts, which I am very glad of, and
the more for that I think it will not do me any hurt at all. Other
discourse, much especially about the heat the House was in yesterday
about the ill management of the Navy, which I was sorry to hear; though
I think they were well answered, both by Sir G. Carteret and [Sir] W.
Coventry, as he informs me the substance of their speeches. Having done
with him, home mightily satisfied with my being with him, and coming
home I to church, and there, beyond expectation, find our seat, and all
the church crammed, by twice as many people as used to be: and to my
great joy find Mr. Frampton in the pulpit; so to my great joy I hear him
preach, and I think the best sermon, for goodness and oratory, without
affectation or study, that ever I heard in my life. The truth is, he
preaches the most like an apostle that ever I heard man; and it was
much the best time that ever I spent in my life at church. His text,
Ecclesiastes xi., verse 8th--the words, “But if a man live many years,
and rejoice in them all, yet let him remember the days of darkness, for
they shall be many. All that cometh is vanity.” He done, I home, and
there Michell and his wife, and we dined and mighty merry, I mightily
taken more and more with her. After dinner I with my brother away by
water to White Hall, and there walked in the Parke, and a little to my
Lord Chancellor’s, where the King and Cabinet met, and there met Mr.
Brisband, with whom good discourse, to White Hall towards night, and
there he did lend me “The Third Advice to a Paynter,” a bitter satyre
upon the service of the Duke of Albemarle the last year. I took it
home with me, and will copy it, having the former, being also mightily
pleased with it. So after reading it, I to Sir W. Pen to discourse a
little with him about the business of our prizes, and so home to supper
and to bed.