19th. Up, and to the office all the morning, doing a great deal of
business. At noon to dinner betimes, and then my wife and I by coach
to the Duke’s house, calling at Lovett’s, where I find my Lady
Castlemayne’s picture not yet done, which has lain so many months there,
which vexes me, but I mean not to trouble them more after this is done.
So to the playhouse, not much company come, which I impute to the heat
of the weather, it being very hot. Here we saw “Macbeth,”

     [See November 5th, 1664.  Downes wrote: “The Tragedy of Macbeth,
     alter’d by Sir William Davenant; being drest in all it’s finery, as
     new cloaths, new scenes,  machines as flyings for the Witches; with
     all the singing and dancing in it.  The first compos’d by Mr. Lock,
     the other by Mr. Channell and Mr. Joseph Preist; it being all
     excellently perform’d, being in the nature of an opera, it
     recompenc’d double the expence; it proves still a lasting play.”]

which, though I have seen it often, yet is it one of the best plays for
a stage, and variety of dancing and musique, that ever I saw. So being
very much pleased, thence home by coach with young Goodyer and his own
sister, who offered us to go in their coach. A good-natured youth I
believe he is, but I fear will mind his pleasures too much. She is
pretty, and a modest, brown girle. Set us down, so my wife and I into
the garden, a fine moonshine evening, and there talking, and among other
things she tells me that she finds by W. Hewer that my people do observe
my minding my pleasure more than usual, which I confess, and am ashamed
of, and so from this day take upon me to leave it till Whit-Sunday.
While we were sitting in the garden comes Mrs. Turner to advise about
her son, the Captain, when I did give her the best advice I could, to
look out for some land employment for him, a peace being at hand, when
few ships will be employed and very many, and these old Captains, to be
provided for. Then to other talk, and among the rest about Sir W. Pen’s
being to buy Wansted House of Sir Robert Brookes, but has put him off
again, and left him the other day to pay for a dinner at a tavern,
which she says our parishioner, Mrs. Hollworthy, talks of; and I dare be
hanged if ever he could mean to buy that great house, that knows not how
to furnish one that is not the tenth part so big. Thence I to my chamber
to write a little, and then to bed, having got a mighty cold in my right
eare and side of my throat, and in much trouble with it almost all the
night.