19th (Lord’s day). Up, and to my chamber to set some papers in order,
and then, to church, where my old acquaintance, that dull fellow,
Meriton, made a good sermon, and hath a strange knack of a grave,
serious delivery, which is very agreeable. After church to White Hall,
and there find Sir G. Carteret just set down to dinner, and I dined with
them, as I intended, and good company, the best people and family in
the world I think. Here was great talk of the good end that my Lord
Treasurer made; closing his owne eyes and setting his mouth, and bidding
adieu with the greatest content and freedom in the world; and is said
to die with the cleanest hands that ever any Lord Treasurer did. After
dinner Sir G. Carteret and I alone, and there, among other discourse, he
did declare that he would be content to part with his place of Treasurer
of the Navy upon good terms. I did propose my Lord Belasses as a man
likely to buy it, which he listened to, and I did fully concur and
promote his design of parting with it, for though I would have my father
live, I would not have him die Treasurer of the Navy, because of the
accounts which must be uncleared at his death, besides many other
circumstances making it advisable for him to let it go. He tells me that
he fears all will come to naught in the nation soon if the King do not
mind his business, which he do not seem likely to do. He says that the
Treasury will be managed for a while by a Commission, whereof he thinks
my Lord Chancellor for the honour of it, and my Lord Ashly, and the two
Secretaries will be, and some others he knows not. I took leave of him,
and directly by water home, and there to read the life of Mr. Hooker,
which pleases me as much as any thing I have read a great while, and by
and by comes Mr. Howe to see us, and after him a little Mr. Sheply, and
so we all to talk, and, Mercer being there, we some of us to sing, and
so to supper, a great deal of silly talk. Among other things, W. Howe
told us how the Barristers and Students of Gray’s Inne rose in rebellion
against the Benchers the other day, who outlawed them, and a great deal
of do; but now they are at peace again. They being gone, I to my book
again, and made an end of Mr. Hooker’s Life, and so to bed.