10th. Up, and to my office a little, and then, in the garden, find Sir
W. Pen; and he and I to Sir W. Batten, where he tells us news of the new
disorders of Hogg and his men in taking out of 30 tons of wine out of a
prize of ours, which makes us mad; and that, added to the unwillingness
of the men to go longer abroad without money, do lead us to conclude
not to keep her abroad any longer, of which I am very glad, for I do not
like our doings with what we have already got, Sir W. Batten ordering
the disposal of our wines and goods, and he leaves it to Morrice the
cooper, who I take to be a cunning proud knave, so that I am very
desirous to adventure no further. So away by water from the Old Swan to
White Hall, and there to Sir W. Coventry’s, with whom I staid a great
while longer than I have done these many months, and had opportunity of
talking with him, and he do declare himself troubled that he hath any
thing left him to do in the Navy, and would be glad to part with his
whole profits and concernments in it, his pains and care being wholly
ineffectual during this lack of money; the expense growing infinite, the
service not to be done, and discipline and order not to be kept, only
from want of money. I begun to discourse with him the business of
Tangier, which by the removal of my Lord Bellasses, is now to have a
new Governor; and did move him, that at this season all the business
of reforming the garrison might be considered, while nobody was to be
offended; and I told him it is plain that we do overspend our revenue:
that the place is of no more profit to the King than it was the first
day, nor in itself of better credit; no more people of condition willing
to live there, nor any thing like a place likely to turn his Majesty to
account: that it hath been hitherto, and, for aught I see, likely only
to be used as a job to do a kindness to some Lord, or he that can get to
be Governor. Sir W. Coventry agreed with me, so as to say, that unless
the King hath the wealth of the Mogul, he would be a beggar to have his
businesses ordered in the manner they now are: that his garrisons must
be made places only of convenience to particular persons that he hath
moved the Duke of York in it; and that it was resolved to send no
Governor thither till there had been Commissioners sent to put the
garrison in order, so as that he that goes may go with limitations and
rules to follow, and not to do as he please, as the rest have hitherto
done. That he is not afeard to speak his mind, though to the displeasure
of any man; and that I know well enough; but that, when it is come, as
it is now, that to speak the truth in behalf of the King plainly do no
good, but all things bore down by other measures than by what is best
for the King, he hath no temptation to be perpetually fighting of
battles, it being more easy to him do those terms to suffer things to go
on without giving any man offence, than to have the same thing done, and
he contract the displeasure of all the world, as he must do, that will
be for the King. I did offer him to draw up my thoughts in this matter
to present to the Duke of York, which he approved of, and I do think
to do it. So away, and by coach going home saw Sir G. Carteret going
towards White Hall. So ‘light and by water met him, and with him to the
King’s little chapel; and afterwards to see the King heal the King’s
Evil, wherein no pleasure, I having seen it before; and then to see him
and the Queene and Duke of York and his wife, at dinner in the Queene’s
lodgings; and so with Sir G. Carteret to his lodgings to dinner; where
very good company; and after dinner he and I to talk alone how things
are managed, and to what ruin we must come if we have not a peace. He
did tell me one occasion, how Sir Thomas Allen, which I took for a man
of known courage and service on the King’s side, was tried for his
life in Prince Rupert’s fleete, in the late times, for cowardice,
and condemned to be hanged, and fled to Jersey; where Sir G. Carteret
received him, not knowing the reason of his coming thither: and that
thereupon Prince Rupert wrote to the Queen-Mother his dislike of Sir
G. Carteret’s receiving a person that stood condemned; and so Sir G.
Carteret was forced to bid him betake himself to some other place. This
was strange to me. Our Commissioners are preparing to go to Bredah to
the treaty, and do design to be going the next week. So away by coach
home, where there should have been a meeting about Carcasse’s business,
but only my Lord and I met, and so broke up, Carcasse having only read
his answer to his charge, which is well writ, but I think will not prove
to his advantage, for I believe him to be a very rogue. So home, and
Balty and I to look Mr. Fenn at Sir G. Carteret’s office in Broad
Streete, and there missing him and at the banker’s hard by, we home, and
I down by water to Deptford Dockyard, and there did a little business,
and so home back again all the way reading a little piece I lately
bought, called “The Virtuoso, or the Stoicke,” proposing many things
paradoxical to our common opinions, wherein in some places he speaks
well, but generally is but a sorry man. So home and to my chamber to
enter my two last days’ journall, and this, and then to supper and to
bed. Blessed be God! I hear that my father is better and better, and
will, I hope, live to enjoy some cheerful days more; but it is strange
what he writes me, that Mr. Weaver, of Huntingdon, who was a lusty,
likely, and but a youngish man, should be dead.