3rd (Lord’s day). Up, and with Sir W. Batten and [Sir] W. Pen to White
Hall, and there to Sir W. Coventry’s chamber, and there staid till
he was ready, talking, and among other things of the Prince’s being
trepanned, which was in doing just as we passed through the Stone
Gallery, we asking at the door of his lodgings, and were told so. We are
all full of wishes for the good success; though I dare say but few do
really concern ourselves for him in our hearts. Up to the Duke of York,
and with him did our business we come about, and among other things
resolve upon a meeting at the office to-morrow morning, Sir W. Coventry
to be there to determine of all things necessary for the setting of Sir
W. Pen to work in his Victualling business. This did awake in me some
thoughts of what might in discourse fall out touching my imployment, and
did give me some apprehension of trouble. Having done here, and after
our laying our necessities for money open to the Duke of York, but
nothing obtained concerning it, we parted, and I with others into the
House, and there hear that the work is done to the Prince in a few
minutes without any pain at all to him, he not knowing when it was done.
It was performed by Moulins. Having cut the outward table, as they call
 corrupted, so as it come out without any force; and their fear is, that
the whole inside of his head is corrupted like that, which do yet make
them afeard of him; but no ill accident appeared in the doing of the
thing, but all with all imaginable success, as Sir Alexander Frazier did
tell me himself, I asking him, who is very kind to me. I to the Chapel a
little, but hearing nothing did take a turn into the Park, and then back
to Chapel and heard a very good Anthem to my heart’s delight, and then
to Sir G. Carteret’s to dinner, and before dinner did walk with him
alone a good while, and from him hear our case likely for all these acts
to be bad for money, which troubles me, the year speeding so fast, and
he tells me that he believes the Duke of York will go to sea with the
fleete, which I am sorry for in respect to his person, but yet there is
no person in condition to command the fleete, now the Captains are
grown so great, but him, it being impossible for anybody else but him to
command any order or discipline among them. He tells me there is nothing
at all in the late discourse about my Lord Sandwich and the French
Embassador meeting and contending for the way, which I wonder at, to see
the confidence of report without any ground. By and by to dinner, where
very good company. Among other discourse, we talked much of Nostradamus

     [Michael Nostradamus, a physician and astrologer, born in the
     diocese of Avignon, 1503.  Amongst other predictions, one was
     interpreted as foreshowing the singular death of Hen. II. of France,
     by which his reputation was increased.]

his prophecy of these times, and the burning of the City of London, some
of whose verses are put into Booker’s’ Almanack this year; and Sir G.
Carteret did tell a story, how at his death he did make the town swear
that he should never be dug up, or his tomb opened, after he was buried;
but they did after sixty years do it, and upon his breast they found a
plate of brasse, saying what a wicked and unfaithful people the people
of that place were, who after so many vows should disturb and open him
such a day and year and hour; which, if true, is very strange. Then we
fell to talking of the burning of the City; and my Lady Carteret herself
did tell us how abundance of pieces of burnt papers were cast by the
wind as far as Cranborne; and among others she took up one, or had
one brought her to see, which was a little bit of paper that had been
printed, whereon there remained no more nor less than these words: “Time
is, it is done.” After dinner I went and took a turn into the Park, and
then took boat and away home, and there to my chamber and to read, but
did receive some letters from Sir W. Coventry, touching the want of
victuals to Kempthorne’s’ fleete going to the Streights and now in the
Downes: which did trouble me, he saying that this disappointment might
prove fatal; and the more, because Sir W. Coventry do intend to come to
the office upon business to-morrow morning, and I shall not know what
answer to give him. This did mightily trouble my mind; however, I fell
to read a little in Hakewill’s Apology, and did satisfy myself mighty
fair in the truth of the saying that the world do not grow old at all,
but is in as good condition in all respects as ever it was as to nature.
I continued reading this book with great pleasure till supper, and
then to bed sooner than ordinary, for rising betimes in the morning
to-morrow. So after reading my usual vows to bed, my mind full of
trouble against to-morrow, and did not sleep any good time of the night
for thoughts of to-morrow morning’s trouble.