30th. Up and to the office, where we sat busy all the morning. At noon
home to dinner, where Daniel and his wife with us, come to see whether
I could get him any employment. But I am so far from it, that I have the
trouble upon my mind how to dispose of Mr. Gibson and one or two more
I am concerned for in the Victualling business, which are to be now
discharged. After dinner by coach to White Hall, calling on two or
three tradesmen and paying their bills, and so to White Hall, to the
Treasury-chamber, where I did speak with the Lords, and did my business
about getting them to assent to 10 per cent. interest on the 11 months
tax, but find them mightily put to it for money. Here I do hear that
there are three Lords more to be added to them; my Lord Bridgewater, my
Lord Anglesey, and my Lord Chamberlaine. Having done my business, I to
Creed’s chamber, and thence out with Creed to White Hall with him; in
our way, meeting with Mr. Cooling, my Lord Chamberlain’s secretary, on
horseback, who stopped to speak with us, and he proved very drunk, and
did talk, and would have talked all night with us, I not being able to
break loose from him, he holding me so by the hand. But, Lord! to see
his present humour, how he swears at every word, and talks of the King
and my Lady Castlemayne in the plainest words in the world. And from him
I gather that the story I learned yesterday is true--that the King hath
declared that he did not get the child of which she is conceived at this
time, he having not as he says lain with her this half year. But she
told him, “God damn me, but you shall own it!” It seems, he is jealous
of Jermin, and she loves him so, that the thoughts of his marrying of my
Lady Falmouth puts her into fits of the mother; and he, it seems, hath
lain with her from time to time, continually, for a good while; and
once, as this Cooling says, the King had like to have taken him
a-bed with her, but that he was fain to creep under the bed into her
closet.... But it is a pretty thing he told us how the King, once
speaking of the Duke of York’s being mastered by his wife, said to some
of the company by, that he would go no more abroad with this Tom Otter
(meaning the Duke of York) and his wife. Tom Killigrew, being by,
answered, “Sir,” says he, “pray which is the best for a man, to be a Tom
Otter to his wife or to his mistress?” meaning the King’s being so to
my Lady Castlemayne. Thus he went on; and speaking then of my Lord
Sandwich, whom he professed to love exceedingly, says Creed, “I know not
what, but he is a man, methinks, that I could love for himself, without
other regards.”... He talked very lewdly; and then took notice of my
kindness to him on shipboard seven years ago, when the King was coming
over, and how much he was obliged to me; but says, pray look upon this
acknowledgement of a kindness in me to be a miracle; for, says he, “it
is against the law at Court for a man that borrows money of me, even
to buy his place with, to own it the next Sunday;” and then told us his
horse was a bribe, and his boots a bribe; and told us he was made up of
bribes, as an Oxford scholar is set out with other men’s goods when he
goes out of town, and that he makes every sort of tradesman to bribe
him; and invited me home to his house, to taste of his bribe wine. I
never heard so much vanity from a man in my life; so, being now weary of
him, we parted, and I took coach, and carried Creed to the Temple. There
set him down, and to my office, where busy late till my eyes begun to
ake, and then home to supper: a pullet, with good sauce, to my liking,
and then to play on the flageolet with my wife, which she now does very
prettily, and so to bed.