8th. Up pretty betimes and out of doors, and in Fen Church street
met Mr. Lovett going with a picture to me, but I could not stand to
discourse or see it, but on to the next hackney coach and so to Sir W.
Coventry, where he and I alone a while discoursing of some businesses
of the office, and then up to the Duke of York to his chamber with my
fellow brethren who are come, and so did our usual weekly business,
which was but little to-day, and I was glad that the business of
Carcasse was not mentioned because our report was not ready, but I am
resolved it shall against the next coming to the Duke of York. Here was
discourse about a way of paying our old creditors which did please me,
there being hopes of getting them comprehended within the 11 months Tax,
and this did give occasion for Sir G. Carteret’s and my going to Sir
Robert Long to discourse it, who do agree that now the King’s Council
do say that they may be included in the Act, which do make me very glad,
not so much for the sake of the poor men as for the King, for it would
have been a ruin to him and his service not to have had a way to have
paid the debt. There parted with Sir G. Carteret and into Westminster
Hall, where I met with Sir H. Cholmly, and he and I to Sir Ph.
Warwicke’s to speak a little about our Tangier business, but to little
purpose, my Lord Treasurer being so ill that no business can be done.
Thence with Sir H. Cholmly to find out Creed from one lodging to
another, which he hath changed so often that there is no finding him,
but at last do come to his lodging that he is entering into this day,
and do find his goods unlading at the door, by Scotland Yard, and there
I set down Sir H. Cholmly, and I away to the ‘Change, where spoke about
several things, and then going home did meet Mr. Andrews our neighbour,
and did speak with him to enquire about the ground behind our house, of
which I have a mind to buy enough to make a stable and coach-house; for
I do see that my condition do require it, as well as that it is more
charge to my purse to live as I do than to keep one, and therefore I
am resolved before winter to have one, unless some extraordinary thing
happens to hinder me. He promises me to look after it for me, and so I
home to dinner, where I find my wife’s flageolette master, and I am
so pleased with her proceeding, though she hath lost time by not
practising, that I am resolved for the encouragement of the man to
learn myself a little for a month or so, for I do foresee if God send my
wife and I to live, she will become very good company for me. He gone,
comes Lovett with my little print of my dear Lady Castlemayne varnished,
and the frame prettily done like gold, which pleases me well. He dined
with me, but by his discourse I do still see that he is a man of good
wit but most strange experience, and acquaintance with all manner of
subtleties and tricks, that I do think him not fit for me to keep any
acquaintance with him, lest he some time or other shew me a slippery
trick. After dinner, he gone, I to the office, where all the afternoon
very busy, and so in the evening to Sir R. Viner’s, thinking to finish
my accounts there, but am prevented, and so back again home, and late at
my office at business, and so home to supper and sing a little with my
dear wife, and so to bed.