27th. Up, and there comes Greeting my flagelette master, and I practised
with him. There come also Richardson, the bookbinder, with one of
Ogilby’s Bibles in quires for me to see and buy, it being Mr. Cade’s,
my stationer’s; but it is like to be so big that I shall not use it, it
being too great to stir up and down without much trouble, which I shall
not like nor do intend it for. So by water to White Hall, and there find
Sir G. Carteret at home, and talked with him a while, and find that the
new Commissioners of the Treasury did meet this morning. So I to find
out Sir W. Coventry, but missed, only I do hear that they have chosen
Sir G. Downing for their Secretary; and I think in my conscience they
have done a great thing in it; for he is a business active man, and
values himself upon having of things do well under his hand; so that I
am mightily pleased in their choice. Here I met Mr. Pierce, who tells me
that he lately met Mr. Carcasse, who do mightily inveigh against me, for
that all that has been done against him he lays on me, and I think he is
in the right and I do own it, only I find what I suspected, that he do
report that Sir W. Batten and I, who never agreed before, do now, and
since this business agree even more, which I did fear would be thought,
and therefore will find occasion to undeceive the world in that
particular by promoting something shortly against [Sir] W. Batten. So
home, and there to sing with my wife before dinner, and then to dinner,
and after dinner comes Carcasse to speak with me, but I would not give
him way to enlarge on anything, but he would have begun to have made a
noise how I have undone him and used all the wit I could in the drawing
up of his report, wherein he told me I had taken a great deal of pains
to undo him. To which I did not think fit to enter into any answer, but
dismissed him, and so I again up to my chamber, vexed at the impudence
of this rogue, but I think I shall be wary enough for him: So to my
chamber, and there did some little business, and then abroad, and
stopped at the Bear-garden-stairs, there to see a prize fought. But the
house so full there was no getting in there, so forced to go through an
alehouse into the pit, where the bears are baited; and upon a stool did
see them fight, which they did very furiously, a butcher and a waterman.
The former had the better all along, till by and by the latter dropped
his sword out of his hand, and the butcher, whether not seeing his sword
dropped I know not, but did give him a cut over the wrist, so as he
was disabled to fight any longer. But, Lord! to see how in a minute
the whole stage was full of watermen to revenge the foul play, and the
butchers to defend their fellow, though most blamed him; and there they
all fell to it to knocking down and cutting many on each side. It was
pleasant to see, but that I stood in the pit, and feared that in the
tumult I might get some hurt. At last the rabble broke up, and so I away
to White Hall and so to St. James’s, but I found not Sir W. Coventry, so
into the Park and took a turn or two, it being a most sweet day, and
so by water home, and with my father and wife walked in the garden, and
then anon to supper and to bed. The Duke of Cambridge very ill still.