3rd. Up, and within most of the morning, my tailor’s boy coming to alter
something in my new suit I put on yesterday. Then to the office and did
business, and then (my wife being a little ill of those in bed) I to Sir
W. Batten’s and dined, and there comes in Sir Richard Ford, tells us how
he hath been at the Sessions-house, and there it is plain that there is
a combination of rogues in the town, that do make it their business
to set houses on fire, and that one house they did set on fire in
Aldersgate Streete last Easter; and that this is proved by two young
men, whom one of them debauched by degrees to steal their fathers’ plate
and clothes, and at last to be of their company; and they had their
places to take up what goods were flung into the streets out of the
windows, when the houses were on fire; and this is like to be proved to
a great number of rogues, whereof five are already found, and some found
guilty this day. One of these boys is the son of a Montagu, of my Lord
Manchester’s family; but whose son he could not tell me. This is a
strange thing methinks, but I am glad that it is proved so true and
discovered. So home, and to enter my Journall of my late journey to this
hour, and then to the office, where to do a little business, and then by
water to White Hall (calling at Michell’s in my way, but the rogue would
not invite me in, I having a mind para voir his wife), and there to the
Council-chamber, to deliver a letter to their Lordships about the state
of the six merchantmen which we have been so long fitting out. When
I come, the King and the whole table full of Lords were hearing of a
pitifull cause of a complaint of an old man, with a great grey beard,
against his son, for not allowing him something to live on; and at last
come to the ordering the son to allow his father L10 a year. This cause
lasted them near two hours; which, methinks, at this time to be the work
of the Council-board of England, is a scandalous thing, and methought
Sir W. Coventry to me did own as much. Here I find all the newes is the
enemy’s landing 3,000 men near Harwich,

     [Richard Browne, writing to Williamson from Aldeburgh, on July 2nd,
     says: “The Dutch fleet of 80 sail has anchored in the bay; they were
     expected to land, but they tacked about, and stood first northward
     and then southward, close by Orford lighthouse, and have now passed
     the Ness towards Harwich; they have fired no guns, but made false
     fires” (“Calendar of State Papers,” 1667, p. 258).]

and attacking Landguard Fort, and being beat off thence with our great
guns, killing some of their men, and they leaving their ladders behind
them; but we had no Horse in the way on Suffolk side, otherwise we might
have galled their Foot. The Duke of York is gone down thither this day,
while the General sat sleeping this afternoon at the Council-table. The
news so much talked of this Exchange, of a peace, I find by Sir Richard
Browne arises from a letter the Swedes’ agent hath received from Bredah
and shewed at Court to-day, that they are come very near it, but I
do not find anybody here relying upon it. This cause being over, the
Trinity House men, whom I did not expect to meet, were called in, and
there Sir W. Pen made a formal speech in answer to a question of the
King’s, whether the lying of the sunk ships in the river would spoil
the river. But, Lord! how gingerly he answered it, and with a deal of
do that he did not know whether it would be safe as to the enemy to have
them taken up, but that doubtless it would be better for the river to
have them taken up. Methought the Council found them answer like fools,
and it ended in bidding them think more of it, and bring their answer
in writing. Thence I to Westminster Hall, and there hear how they talk
against the present management of things, and against Sir W. Coventry
for his bringing in of new commanders and casting out the old seamen,
which I did endeavour to rectify Mrs. Michell and them in, letting
them know that he hath opposed it all his life the most of any man in
England. After a deal of this tittle tattle, I to Mrs. Martin’s,
and there she was gone in before, but when I come, contrary to my
expectation, I find her all in trouble, and what was it for but that I
have got her with child.... and is in exceeding grief, and swears that
the child is mine, which I do not believe, but yet do comfort her that
either it cannot be so, or if it be that I will take care to send for
her husband, though I do hardly see how I can be sure of that, the ship
being at sea, and as far as Scotland, but however I must do it, and
shall find some way or other of doing it, though it do trouble me not a
little. Thence, not pleased, away to White Hall to Mr. Williamson,
and by and by my Lord Arlington about Mr. Lanyon’s business, and it is
pretty to see how Mr. Williamson did altogether excuse himself that my
business was not done when I come to my Lord and told him my business;
“Why,” says my Lord, “it hath been done, and the King signed it several
days ago,” and so it was and was in Mr. Williamson’s hands, which made
us both laugh, and I in innocent mirth, I remember, said, it is pretty
to see in what a condition we are that all our matters now-a-days are
undone, we know not how, and done we know not when. He laughed at it,
but I have since reflected on it, and find it a severe speech as it
might be taken by a chief minister of state, as indeed Mr. Williamson
is, for he is indeed the Secretary. But we fell to other pleasant talk,
and a fine gentleman he is, and so gave him L5 for his fee, and away
home, and to Sir W. Batten’s to talk a little, and then to the office to
do a little business, and so home to supper and read myself asleep, and
then to bed.