14th (Lord’s day). Up, and my wife, a little before four, and to make us
ready; and by and by Mrs. Turner come to us, by agreement, and she and I
staid talking below, while my wife dressed herself, which vexed me that
she was so long about it keeping us till past five o’clock before she
was ready. She ready; and, taking some bottles of wine, and beer, and
some cold fowle with us into the coach, we took coach and four horses,
which I had provided last night, and so away. A very fine day, and so
towards Epsum, talking all the way pleasantly, and particularly of the
pride and ignorance of Mrs. Lowther, in having of her train carried up?
The country very fine, only the way very dusty. We got to Epsum by eight
o’clock, to the well; where much company, and there we ‘light, and I
drank the water: they did not, but do go about and walk a little among
the women, but I did drink four pints, and had some very good stools by
it. Here I met with divers of our town, among others with several of the
tradesmen of our office, but did talk but little with them, it growing
hot in the sun, and so we took coach again and to the towne, to the
King’s Head, where our coachman carried us, and there had an ill room
for us to go into, but the best in the house that was not taken up. Here
we called for drink, and bespoke dinner; and hear that my Lord Buckhurst
and Nelly are lodged at the next house, and Sir Charles Sidly with them
and keep a merry house. Poor girl! I pity her; but more the loss of her
at the King’s house. Here I saw Gilsthrop, Sir W. Batten’s clerk that
hath been long sick, he looks like a dying man, with a consumption
got, as is believed, by the pox, but God knows that the man is in a sad
condition, though he finds himself much better since his coming thither,
he says. W. Hewer rode with us, and I left him and the women, and myself
walked to church, where few people, contrary to what I expected, and
none I knew, but all the Houblons, brothers, and them after sermon I did
salute, and walk with towards my inne, which was in their way to their
lodgings. They come last night to see their elder brother, who stays
here at the waters, and away to-morrow. James did tell me that I was the
only happy man of the Navy, of whom, he says, during all this freedom
the people have taken of speaking treason, he hath not heard one bad
word of me, which is a great joy to me; for I hear the same of others,
but do know that I have deserved as well as most. We parted to meet
anon, and I to my women into a better room, which the people of the
house borrowed for us, and there to dinner, a good dinner, and were
merry, and Pendleton come to us, who happened to be in the house, and
there talked and were merry. After dinner, he gone, we all lay down
after dinner (the day being wonderful hot) to sleep, and each of us took
a good nap, and then rose; and Tom Wilson come to see me, and sat and
talked an hour; and I perceive he hath been much acquainted with Dr.
Fuller (Tom) and Dr. Pierson, and several of the great cavalier parsons
during the late troubles; and I was glad to hear him talk of them, which
he did very ingeniously, and very much of Dr. Fuller’s art of memory,
which he did tell me several instances of. By and by he parted, and we
took coach and to take the ayre, there being a fine breeze abroad; and
I went and carried them to the well, and there filled some bottles of
water to carry home with me; and there talked with the two women that
farm the well, at L12 per annum, of the lord of the manor, Mr. Evelyn
(who with his lady, and also my Lord George Barkeley’s lady, and their
fine daughter, that the King of France liked so well, and did dance so
rich in jewells before the King at the Ball I was at, at our Court, last
winter, and also their son, a Knight of the Bath, were at church this
morning). Here W. Hewer’s horse broke loose, and we had the sport to see
him taken again. Then I carried them to see my cozen Pepys’s house,
and ‘light, and walked round about it, and they like it, as indeed it
deserves, very well, and is a pretty place; and then I walked them to
the wood hard by, and there got them in the thickets till they had lost
themselves, and I could not find the way into any of the walks in the
wood, which indeed are very pleasant, if I could have found them. At
last got out of the wood again; and I, by leaping down the little bank,
coming out of the wood, did sprain my right foot, which brought me great
present pain, but presently, with walking, it went away for the present,
and so the women and W. Hewer and I walked upon the Downes, where a
flock of sheep was; and the most pleasant and innocent sight that ever I
saw in my life--we find a shepherd and his little boy reading, far from
any houses or sight of people, the Bible to him; so I made the boy read
to me, which he did, with the forced tone that children do usually read,
that was mighty pretty, and then I did give him something, and went to
the father, and talked with him; and I find he had been a servant in my
cozen Pepys’s house, and told me what was become of their old servants.
He did content himself mightily in my liking his boy’s reading, and did
bless God for him, the most like one of the old patriarchs that ever
I saw in my life, and it brought those thoughts of the old age of the
world in my mind for two or three days after. We took notice of his
woolen knit stockings of two colours mixed, and of his shoes shod with
iron shoes, both at the toe and heels, and with great nails in the soles
of his feet, which was mighty pretty: and, taking notice of them, “Why,”
 says the poor man, “the downes, you see, are full of stones, and we are
faine to shoe ourselves thus; and these,” says he, “will make the stones
fly till they sing before me.” I did give the poor man something, for
which he was mighty thankful, and I tried to cast stones with his horne
crooke. He values his dog mightily, that would turn a sheep any way
which he would have him, when he goes to fold them: told me there
was about eighteen scoare sheep in his flock, and that he hath four
shillings a week the year round for keeping of them: so we posted thence
with mighty pleasure in the discourse we had with this poor man, and
Mrs. Turner, in the common fields here, did gather one of the prettiest
nosegays that ever I saw in my life. So to our coach, and through Mr.
Minnes’s wood, and looked upon Mr. Evelyn’s house; and so over the
common, and through Epsum towne to our inne, in the way stopping a poor
woman with her milk-pail, and in one of my gilt tumblers did drink our
bellyfulls of milk, better than any creame; and so to our inne, and
there had a dish of creame, but it was sour, and so had no pleasure in
it; and so paid our reckoning, and took coach, it being about seven
at night, and passed and saw the people walking with their wives and
children to take the ayre, and we set out for home, the sun by and by
going down, and we in the cool of the evening all the way with much
pleasure home, talking and pleasing ourselves with the pleasure of this
day’s work, Mrs. Turner mightily pleased with my resolution, which, I
tell her, is never to keep a country-house, but to keep a coach, and
with my wife on the Saturday to go sometimes for a day to this place,
and then quit to another place; and there is more variety and as little
charge, and no trouble, as there is in a country-house. Anon it
grew dark, and as it grew dark we had the pleasure to see several
glow-wormes, which was mighty pretty, but my foot begins more and more
to pain me, which Mrs. Turner, by keeping her warm hand upon it, did
much ease; but so that when we come home, which was just at eleven at
night, I was not able to walk from the lane’s end to my house without
being helped, which did trouble me, and therefore to bed presently, but,
thanks be to God, found that I had not been missed, nor any business
happened in my absence. So to bed, and there had a cerecloth laid to my
foot and leg alone, but in great pain all night long.