7th. Lay long in bed. Then up and to the office, where busy all the
morning. At noon (my wife being gone to Westminster) I with my Lord
Bruncker by coach as far as the Temple, in the way he telling me that my
Lady Denham is at last dead. Some suspect her poisoned, but it will
be best known when her body is opened, which will be to-day, she dying
yesterday morning. The Duke of York is troubled for her; but hath
declared he will never have another public mistress again; which I shall
be glad of, and would the King would do the like. He tells me how the
Parliament is grown so jealous of the King’s being unfayre to them in
the business of the Bill for examining Accounts, Irish Bill, and the
business of the Papists, that they will not pass the business for money
till they see themselves secure that those Bills will pass; which they
do observe the Court to keep off till all the Bills come together, that
the King may accept what he pleases, and what he pleases to reject,
which will undo all our business and the kingdom too. He tells me how
Mr. Henry Howard, of Norfolke, hath given our Royal Society all his
grandfather’s library: which noble gift they value at L1000; and gives
them accommodation to meet in at his house, Arundell House, they being
now disturbed at Gresham College. Thence ‘lighting at the Temple to the
ordinary hard by and eat a bit of meat, and then by coach to fetch
my wife from her brother’s, and thence to the Duke’s house, and saw
“Macbeth,” which, though I saw it lately, yet appears a most excellent
play in all respects, but especially in divertisement, though it be a
deep tragedy; which is a strange perfection in a tragedy, it being most
proper here, and suitable. So home, it being the last play now I am to
see till a fortnight hence, I being from the last night entered into my
vowes for the year coming on. Here I met with the good newes of Hogg’s
bringing in two prizes more to Plymouth, which if they prove but any
part of them, I hope, at least, we shall be no losers by them. So home
from the office, to write over fair my vowes for this year, and then
to supper, and to bed. In great peace of mind having now done it, and
brought myself into order again and a resolution of keeping it, and
having entered my journall to this night, so to bed, my eyes failing me
with writing.