9th. Up. and to the office a while, none of my fellow officers coming to
sit, it being holiday, and so towards noon I to the Exchange, and there
do hear mighty cries for peace, and that otherwise we shall be undone;
and yet I do suspect the badness of the peace we shall make. Several do
complain of abundance of land flung up by tenants out of their hands
for want of ability to pay their rents; and by name, that the Duke of
Buckingham hath L6000 so flung up. And my father writes, that Jasper
Trice, upon this pretence of his tenants’ dealing with him, is broke
up housekeeping, and gone to board with his brother, Naylor, at Offord;
which is very sad. So home to dinner, and after dinner I took coach and
to the King’s house, and by and by comes after me my wife with W. Hewer
and his mother and Barker, and there we saw “The Tameing of a Shrew,”
 which hath some very good pieces in it, but generally is but a mean
play; and the best part, “Sawny,”

     [This play was entitled “Sawney the Scot, or the Taming of a Shrew,”
      and consisted of an alteration of Shakespeare’s play by John Lacy.
     Although it had long been popular it was not printed until 1698.  In
     the old “Taming of a Shrew” (1594), reprinted by Thomas Amyot for
     the Shakespeare Society in 1844, the hero’s servant is named Sander,
     and this seems to have given the hint to Lacy, when altering
     Shakespeare’s “Taming of the Shrew,” to foist a ‘Scotsman into the
     action.  Sawney was one of Lacy’s favourite characters, and occupies
     a prominent position in Michael Wright’s picture at Hampton Court.
     Evelyn, on October 3rd, 1662, “visited Mr. Wright, a Scotsman, who
     had liv’d long at Rome, and was esteem’d a good painter,” and he
     singles out as his best picture, “Lacy, the famous Roscius, or
     comedian, whom he has painted in three dresses, as a gallant, a
     Presbyterian minister, and a Scotch Highlander in his plaid.”
      Langbaine and Aubrey both make the mistake of ascribing the third
     figure to Teague in “The Committee;” and in spite of Evelyn’s clear
     statement, his editor in a note follows them in their blunder.
     Planche has reproduced the picture in his “History of Costume”
      (Vol. ii., p. 243).]

done by Lacy, hath not half its life, by reason of the words, I suppose,
not being understood, at least by me. After the play was done, as I come
so I went away alone, and had a mind to have taken out Knipp to have
taken the ayre with her, and to that end sent a porter in to her that
she should take a coach and come to me to the Piatza in Covent Garden,
where I waited for her, but was doubtful I might have done ill in doing
it if we should be visti ensemble, sed elle was gone out, and so I was
eased of my care, and therefore away to Westminster to the Swan, and
there did baiser la little missa.... and drank, and then by water to the
Old Swan, and there found Betty Michell sitting at the door, it being
darkish. I staid and talked a little with her, but no once baiser la,
though she was to my thinking at this time une de plus pretty mohers
that ever I did voir in my vida, and God forgive me my mind did run
sobre elle all the vespre and night and la day suivante. So home and to
the office a little, and then to Sir W. Batten’s, where he tells me how
he hath found his lady’s jewels again, which have been so long lost, and
a servant imprisoned and arraigned, and they were in her closet under a
china cup, where he hath servants will swear they did look in searching
the house; but Mrs. Turner and I, and others, do believe that they were
only disposed of by my Lady, in case she had died, to some friends of
hers, and now laid there again. So home to supper, and to read the book
I bought yesterday of the Turkish policy, which is a good book, well
writ, and so owned by Dr. Clerke yesterday to me, commending it mightily
to me for my reading as the only book of the subject that ever was writ,
yet so designedly. So to bed.