4th. Up, and to White Hall to attend the Council about Commissioner
Pett’s business, along with my Lord Bruncker and Sir W. Pen, and in the
Robe-chamber the Duke of York come to us, the officers of the Navy, and
there did meet together about Navy business, where Sir W. Coventry was
with us, and among other things did recommend his Royal Highness, now
the prizes were disposing, to remember Sir John Harman to the King, for
some bounty, and also for my Lady Minnes, which was very nobly done of
him. Thence all of us to attend the Council, where we were anon called
on, and there was a long hearing of Commissioner Pett, who was there,
and there were the two Masters Attendant of Chatham called in, who do
deny their having any order from Commissioner Pett about bringing up
the great ships, which gives the lie to what he says; but, in general,
I find him to be but a weak, silly man, and that is guilty of horrid
neglect in this business all along. Here broke off without coming to an
issue, but that there should be another hearing on Monday next. So the
Council rose, and I staid walking up and down the galleries till the
King went to dinner, and then I to my Lord Crew’s to dinner; but he
having dined, I took a very short leave, confessing I had not dined; and
so to an ordinary hard by the Temple-gate, where I have heretofore been,
and there dined--cost me 10d. And so to my Lord Ashly’s, where after
dinner Sir H. Cholmly, Creed and I, with his Lordship, about Mr.
Yeabsly’s business, where having come to agreement with him abating
him L1000 of what he demands for ships lost, I to Westminster, to
Mrs. Martin’s lodging, whither I sent for her, and there hear that her
husband is come from sea, which is sooner than I expected; and here I
staid and drank, and so did toucher elle and away, and so by coach to my
tailor’s, and thence to my Lord Crew’s, and there did stay with him
an hour till almost night, discoursing about the ill state of my Lord
Sandwich, that he can neither be got to be called home, nor money got to
maintain him there; which will ruin his family. And the truth is, he do
almost deserve it, for by all relation he hath, in a little more than a
year and a half, spent L20,000 of the King’s money, and the best part of
L10,000 of his own; which is a most prodigious expence, more than
ever Embassador spent there, and more than these Commissioners of the
Treasury will or do allow. And they demand an account before they will
give him any more money; which puts all his friends to a loss what to
answer. But more money we must get him, or to be called home. I offer
to speak to Sir W. Coventry about it; but my Lord will not advise to
it, without consent of Sir G. Carteret. So home, and there to see Sir
W. Batten, who fell sick yesterday morning: He is asleep: and so I could
not see him; but in an hour after, word is brought me that he is so ill,
that it is believed he cannot live till to-morrow, which troubles me and
my wife mightily, partly out of kindness, he being a good neighbour and
partly because of the money he owes me, upon our bargain of the late
prize. So home and to supper and to bed.