80 of them: so that he was W. Coventry’s mere broker, as Sir W. Batten
and my Lady did once tell my Lady Duchess of Albemarle, in the case of
Mr. Falconer, whom W. Pen made to give W. Coventry L200 for his place
of Clerk of the Rope Yard of Woolwich, and to settle L80 a year upon his
daughter Pegg, after the death of his wife, and a gold watch presently
to his wife. Mrs. Turner do tell me that my Lady and Pegg have
themselves owned to her that Sir W. Coventry and Sir W. Pen had private
marks to write to one another by, that when they in appearance writ a
fair letter in behalf of anybody, that they had a little mark to
show they meant it only in shew: this, these silly people did confess
themselves of him. She says that their son, Mr. William Pen, did tell
her that his father did observe the commanders did make their addresses
to me and applications, but they should know that his father should
be the chief of the office, and that she hath observed that Sir W. Pen
never had a kindness to her son, since W. Pen told her son that he had
applied himself to me. That his rise hath been by her and her husband’s
means, and that it is a most inconceivable thing how this man can have
the face to use her and her family with the neglect that he do them.
That he was in the late war a most devilish plunderer, and that got him
his estate, which he hath in Ireland, and nothing else, and that he hath
always been a very liberal man in his bribes, that upon his coming into
this part of the Controller’s business wherein he is, he did send for T.
Willson and told him how against his knowledge he was put in, and had so
little wit as to say to him, “This will make the pot boyle, will it not,
Mr. Willson? will it not make the pot boyle?” and do offer him to
come in and do his business for him, and he would reward him. This Mr.
Willson did come and tell her presently, he having been their servant,
and to this day is very faithful to them. That her husband’s not being
forward to make him a bill for Rere Admirall’s pay and Generall’s pay
both at the same time after he was first made Generall did first give
him occasion of keeping a distance from him, since which they have
never been great friends, Pen having by degrees been continually growing
higher and higher, till now that he do wholly slight them and use them
only as servants. Upon the whole, she told me stories enough to confirm
me that he is the most false fellow that ever was born of woman, and
that so she thinks and knows him to be.