5th. Up, and with Mr. Kenasteri by coach to White Hall to the
Commissioners of the Treasury about getting money for Tangier, and did
come to, after long waiting, speak with them, and there I find them all
sat; and, among the rest, Duncomb lolling, with his heels upon another
chair, by that, that he sat upon, and had an answer good enough, and
then away home, and (it being a most windy day, and hath been so all
night, South West, and we have great hopes that it may have done the
Dutch or French fleets some hurt) having got some papers in order, I
back to St. James’s, where we all met at Sir W. Coventry’s chamber, and
dined and talked of our business, he being a most excellent man, and
indeed, with all his business, hath more of his employed upon the good
of the service of the Navy, than all of us, that makes me ashamed of
it. This noon Captain Perriman brings us word how the Happy Returne’s’
[crew] below in the Hope, ordered to carry the Portugal Embassador to
Holland (and the Embassador, I think, on board), refuse to go till paid;
and by their example two or three more ships are in a mutiny: which is
a sad consideration, while so many of the enemy’s ships are at this
day triumphing in the sea. Here a very good and neat dinner, after the
French manner, and good discourse, and then up after dinner to the
Duke of York and did our usual business, and are put in hopes by Sir W.
Coventry that we shall have money, and so away, Sir G. Carteret and I
to my Lord Crew to advise about Sir G. Carteret’s carrying his accounts
to-morrow to the Commissioners appointed to examine them and all other
accounts since the war, who at last by the King’s calling them to him
yesterday and chiding them will sit, but Littleton and Garraway much
against their wills. The truth of it is, it is a ridiculous thing, for
it will come to nothing, nor do the King nor kingdom good in any manner,
I think. Here they talked of my Lord Hinchingbroke’s match with Lord
Burlington’s daughter, which is now gone a pretty way forward, and to
great content, which I am infinitely glad of. So from hence to White
Hall, and in the streete Sir G. Carteret showed me a gentleman coming by
in his coach, who hath been sent for up out of Lincolneshire, I think he
says he is a justice of peace there, that the Council have laid by the
heels here, and here lies in a messenger’s hands, for saying that a man
and his wife are but one person, and so ought to pay but 12d. for both
to the Poll Bill; by which others were led to do the like: and so here
he lies prisoner. To White Hall, and there I attended to speak with Sir
W. Coventry about Lanyon’s business, to get him some money out of the
Prize Office from my Lord Ashly, and so home, and there to the office
a little, and thence to my chamber to read, and supper, and to bed. My
father, blessed be God! finds great ease by his new steel trusse, which
he put on yesterday. So to bed. The Duke of Cambridge past hopes of
living still.