31st. Up, and all the morning at the office, and at noon Mr. Creed and
Yeabsly dined with me (my wife gone to dine with Mrs. Pierce and see
a play with her), and after dinner in comes Mr. Turner, of Eynsbury,
lately come to town, and also after him Captain Hill of the “Coventry,”
 who lost her at Barbadoes, and is come out of France, where he hath
been long prisoner. After a great deal of mixed discourse, and then Mr.
Turner and I alone a little in my closet, talking about my Lord Sandwich
(who I hear is now ordered by the King to come home again), we all
parted, and I by water, calling at Michell’s, and saw and once kissed
su wife, but I do think that he is jealous of her, and so she dares not
stand out of his sight; so could not do more, but away by water to the
Temple, and there, after spending a little time in my bookseller’s shop,
I to Westminster; and there at the lobby do hear by Commissioner Pett,
to my great amazement, that he is in worse condition than before, by
the coming in of the Duke of Albemarle’s and Prince Rupert’s Narratives’
this day; wherein the former do most severely lay matters upon him, so
as the House this day have, I think, ordered him to the Tower again, or
something like it; so that the poor man is likely to be overthrown, I
doubt, right or wrong, so infinite fond they are of any thing the Duke
of Albemarle says or writes to them! I did then go down, and there met
with Colonel Reames and cozen Roger Pepys; and there they do tell me how
the Duke of Albemarle and the Prince have laid blame on a great many,
and particularly on our Office in general; and particularly for want of
provision, wherein I shall come to be questioned again in that business
myself; which do trouble me. But my cozen Pepys and I had much discourse
alone: and he do bewail the constitution of this House, and says there
is a direct caball and faction, as much as is possible between those for
and those against the Chancellor, and so in other factions, that there
is nothing almost done honestly and with integrity; only some few, he
says, there are, that do keep out of all plots and combinations, and
when their time comes will speak and see right done, if possible; and
that he himself is looked upon to be a man that will be of no faction,
and so they do shun to make him; and I am glad of it. He tells me that
he thanks God he never knew what it was to be tempted to be a knave in
his life; till he did come into the House of Commons, where there is
nothing done but by passion, and faction, and private interest.
Reames did tell me of a fellow last night (one Kelsy, a commander of a
fire-ship, who complained for want of his money paid him) did say
that he did see one of the Commissioners of the Navy bring in three
waggon-loads of prize-goods into Greenwich one night; but that the House
did take no notice of it, nor enquire; but this is me, and I must expect
to be called to account, and answer what I did as well as I can. So
thence away home, and in Holborne, going round, it being dark, I espied
Sir D. Gawden’s coach, and so went out of mine into his; and there
had opportunity to talk of the business of victuals, which the Duke of
Albemarle and Prince did complain that they were in want of the last
year: but we do conclude we shall be able to show quite the contrary of
that; only it troubles me that we must come to contend with these great
persons, which will overrun us. So with some disquiet in my mind on this
account I home, and there comes Mr. Yeabsly, and he and I to even some
accounts, wherein I shall be a gainer about L200, which is a seasonable
profit, for I have got nothing a great while; and he being gone, I to
bed.