21st. Up, and to the office, where all the morning, and at noon home,
where my wife not very well, but is to go to Mr. Mills’s child’s
christening, where she is godmother, Sir J. Minnes and Sir R. Brookes
her companions. I left her after dinner (my clerks dining with me) to
go with Sir J. Minnes, and I to the office, where did much business till
after candlelight, and then my eyes beginning to fail me, I out and took
coach to Arundell House, where the meeting of Gresham College was broke
up; but there meeting Creed, I with him to the taverne in St. Clement’s
Churchyard, where was Deane Wilkins, Dr. Whistler, Dr. Floyd, a divine
admitted, I perceive, this day, and other brave men; and there, among
other things of news, I do hear, that upon the reading of the House of
Commons’s Reasons of the manner of their proceedings in the business
of my Lord Chancellor, the Reasons were so bad, that my Lord Bristoll
himself did declare that he would not stand to what he had, and did
still, advise the Lords to concur to, upon any of the Reasons of the
House of Commons; but if it was put to the question whether it should be
done on their Reasons, he would be against them; and indeed it seems the
Reasons--however they come to escape the House of Commons, which shews
how slightly the greatest matters are done in this world, and even in
Parliaments were none of them of strength, but the principle of them
untrue; they saying, that where any man is brought before a judge,
accused of Treason in general, without specifying the particular, the
judge do there constantly and is obliged to commit him. Whereas the
question being put by the Lords to my Lord Keeper, he said that quite
the contrary was true: and then, in the Sixth Article (I will get a copy
of them if I can) there are two or three things strangely asserted to
the diminishing of the King’s power, as is said, at least things that
heretofore would not have been heard of. But then the question being put
among the Lords, as my Lord Bristoll advised, whether, upon the whole
matter and Reasons that had been laid before them, they would commit my
Lord Clarendon, it was carried five to one against it; there being but
three Bishops against him, of whom Cosens and Dr. Reynolds were two,
and I know not the third. This made the opposite Lords, as Bristoll
and Buckingham, so mad, that they declared and protested against it,
speaking very broad that there was mutiny and rebellion in the hearts of
the Lords, and that they desired they might enter their dissents,
which they did do, in great fury. So that upon the Lords sending to
the Commons, as I am told, to have a conference for them to give
their answer to the Commons’s Reasons, the Commons did desire a free
conference: but the Lords do deny it; and the reason is, that they hold
not the Commons any Court, but that themselves only are a Court, and the
Chief Court of judicature, and therefore are not to dispute the laws
and method of their own Court with them that are none, and so will not
submit so much as to have their power disputed. And it is conceived that
much of this eagerness among the Lords do arise from the fear some of
them have, that they may be dealt with in the same manner themselves,
and therefore do stand upon it now. It seems my Lord Clarendon hath, as
is said and believed, had his horses several times in his coach, ready
to carry him to the Tower, expecting a message to that purpose; but by
this means his case is like to be laid by. From this we fell to other
discourse, and very good; among the rest they discourse of a man that is
a little frantic, that hath been a kind of minister, Dr. Wilkins saying
that he hath read for him in his church, that is poor and a debauched
man, that the College’ have hired for 20s. to have some of the blood of
a sheep let into his body; and it is to be done on Saturday next.

     [This was Arthur Coga, who had studied at Cambridge, and was said to
     be a bachelor of divinity.  He was indigent, and “looked upon as a
     very freakish and extravagant man.”  Dr. King, in a letter to the
     Hon.  Robert Boyle, remarks “that Mr. Coga was about thirty-two
     years of age; that he spoke Latin well, when he was in company,
     which he liked, but that his brain was sometimes a little too warm.”
      The experiment was performed on November 23rd, 1667, by Dr. King, at
     Arundel House, in the presence of many spectators of quality, and
     four or five physicians.  Coga wrote a description of his own case
     in Latin, and when asked why he had not the blood of some other
     creature, instead of that of a sheep, transfused into him, answered,
     “Sanguis ovis symbolicam quandam facultatem habet cum sanguine
     Christi, quia Christus est agnus Dei” (Birch’s “History of the Royal
     Society,” vol. ii., pp. 214-16).  Coga was the first person in
     England to be experimented upon; previous experiments were made by
     the transfusion of the blood of one dog into another.  See November