31st. At the office all the morning; where, by Sir W. Pen, I do hear
that the Seal was fetched away to the King yesterday from the Lord
Chancellor by Secretary Morrice; which puts me into a great horror, to
have it done after so much debate and confidence that it would not be
done at last. When we arose I took a turn with Lord Bruncker in the
garden, and he tells me that he hath of late discoursed about this
business with Sir W. Coventry, who he finds is the great man in the
doing this business of the Chancellor’s, and that he do persevere in
it, though against the Duke of York’s opinion, to which he says that
the Duke of York was once of the same mind, and if he hath thought fit
since, for any reason, to alter his mind, he hath not found any to alter
his own, and so desires to be excused, for it is for the King’s and
kingdom’s good. And it seems that the Duke of York himself was the first
man that did speak to the King of this, though he hath since altered his
mind; and that W. Coventry did tell the Duke of York that he was not fit
to serve a Prince that did not know how to retire, and live a private
life; and that he was ready for that, if it be his and the King’s
pleasure. After having wrote my letters at the office in the afternoon,
I in the evening to White Hall to see how matters go, and there I met
with Mr. Ball, of the Excise-office, and he tells me that the Seal is
delivered to Sir Orlando Bridgeman; the man of the whole nation that
is the best spoken of, and will please most people; and therefore I am
mighty glad of it. He was then at my Lord Arlington’s, whither I went,
expecting to see him come out; but staid so long, and Sir W. Coventry
coming thither, whom I had not a mind should see me there idle upon a
post-night, I went home without seeing him; but he is there with his
Seal in his hand. So I home, took up my wife, whom I left at Unthanke’s,
and so home, and after signing my letters to bed. This day, being
dissatisfied with my wife’s learning so few songs of Goodgroome, I did
come to a new bargain with him to teach her songs at so much, viz.; 10s.
a song, which he accepts of, and will teach her.