11th. And then rose and called W. Hewer, and he and I, with pails and
a sieve, did lock ourselves into the garden, and there gather all the
earth about the place into pails, and then sift those pails in one of
the summer-houses, just as they do for dyamonds in other parts of the
world; and there, to our great content, did with much trouble by nine
o’clock (and by the time we emptied several pails and could not find
one), we did make the last night’s forty-five up seventy-nine: so that
we are come to about twenty or thirty of what I think the true number
should be; and perhaps within less; and of them I may reasonably think
that Mr. Gibson might lose some: so that I am pretty well satisfied that
my loss is not great, and do bless God that it is so well,

     [About the year 1842, in removing the foundation of an old wall,
     adjoining a mansion at Brampton, always considered the quondam
     residence of the Pepys family, an iron pot, full of silver coins,
     was discovered, and taken to the Earl of Sandwich, the owner of the
     house, in whose possession they still remain.  The pot was so much
     corroded, that a small piece of it only could be preserved.  The
     coins were chiefly half-crowns of Elizabeth and the two elder
     Stuarts, and all of a date anterior to the Restoration.  Although
     Pepys states that the treasure which he caused to be buried was gold
     exclusively, it is very probable that, in the confusion, a pot full
     of silver money was packed up with the rest; but, at all events, the
     coincidence appeared too singular to pass over without notice.--B.]

and do leave my father to make a second examination of the dirt, which
he promises he will do, and, poor man, is mightily troubled for this
accident, but I declared myself very well satisfied, and so indeed I am;
and my mind at rest in it, being but an accident, which is unusual; and
so gives me some kind of content to remember how painful it is sometimes
to keep money, as well as to get it, and how doubtful I was how to keep
it all night, and how to secure it to London: and so got all my gold put
up in bags. And so having the last night wrote to my Lady Sandwich to
lend me John Bowles to go along with me my journey, not telling her the
reason, that it was only to secure my gold, we to breakfast, and then
about ten o’clock took coach, my wife and I, and Willet, and W. Hewer,
and Murford and Bowles (whom my Lady lent me), and my brother John on
horseback; and with these four I thought myself pretty safe. But, before
we went out, the Huntingdon musick come to me and played, and it was
better than that of Cambridge. Here I took leave of my father, and did
give my sister 20s. She cried at my going; but whether it was at her
unwillingness for my going, or any unkindness of my wife’s, or no,
I know not; but, God forgive me! I take her to be so cunning and
ill-natured, that I have no great love for her; but only [she] is my
sister, and must be provided for. My gold I put into a basket, and set
under one of the seats; and so my work every quarter of an hour was to
look to see whether all was well; and I did ride in great fear all
the day, but it was a pleasant day, and good company, and I mightily
contented. Mr. Shepley saw me beyond St. Neots, and there parted, and we
straight to Stevenage, through Bald Lanes, which are already very bad;
and at Stevenage we come well before night, and all sat, and there with
great care I got the gold up to the chamber, my wife carrying one bag,
and the girl another, and W. Hewer the rest in the basket, and set it
all under a bed in our chamber; and then sat down to talk, and were very
pleasant, satisfying myself, among other things, from John Bowles, in
some terms of hunting, and about deere, bucks, and does. And so anon to
supper, and very merry we were, and a good supper, and after supper to
bed. Brecocke alive still, and the best host I know almost.