9th. All the morning busy at the office, doing very considerable
business, and thither comes Sir G. Carteret to talk with me; who seems
to think himself safe as to his particular, but do doubt what will
become of the whole kingdom, things being so broke in pieces. He tells
me that the King himself did the other day very particularly tell the
whole story of my Lord Sandwich’s not following the Dutch ships, with
which he is charged; and shews the reasons of it to be the only good
course he could have taken, and do discourse it very knowingly. This
I am glad of, though, as the King is now, his favour, for aught I see,
serves very little in stead at this day, but rather is an argument
against a man; and the King do not concern himself to relieve or justify
any body, but is wholly negligent of everybody’s concernment. This
morning I was troubled with my Lord Hinchingbroke’s sending to borrow
L200 of me; but I did answer that I had none, nor could borrow any; for
I am resolved I will not be undone for any body, though I would do much
for my Lord Sandwich--for it is to answer a bill of exchange of his, and
I perceive he hath made use of all other means in the world to do it,
but I am resolved to serve him, but not ruin myself, as it may be to
part with so much of the little I have by me to keep if I should by any
turn of times lose the rest. At noon I to the ‘Change, and there did a
little business, and among other things called at Cade’s, the stationer,
where he tells me how my Lord Gerard is troubled for several things in
the House of Commons, and in one wherein himself is concerned; and, it
seems, this Lord is a very proud and wicked man, and the Parliament
is likely to order him. Then home to dinner, and then a little abroad,
thinking to have gone to the other end of the town, but it being almost
night I would not, but home again, and there to my chamber, and all
alone did there draw up my answer to Sir Rob. Brookes’s letter, and when
I had done it went down to my clerks at the office for their opinion
which at this time serves me to very good purpose, they having many
things in their heads which I had not in the businesses of the office
now in dispute. Having done with this, then I home and to supper very
late, and to bed. My [wife] being yet very ill of her looseness, by
which she is forced to lie from me to-night in the girl’s chamber.