11th. Up, and being called on by Mr. Commander, he and I out to the
ground behind Sir W. Pen’s, where I am resolved to take a lease of some
of it for a stable and coach [house], and so to keep a coach, unless
some change come before I can do it, for I do see it is a greater charge
to me now in hackneys, and I am a little dishonoured by going in them.
We spoke with him that hath the letting it, and I do believe when I can
tell how much it will be fit for me to have we shall go near to agree.
So home, and there found my door open, which makes me very angry with
Nell, and do think to put her away for it, though it do so go against
me to part with a servant that it troubles me more than anything in the
world. So to the office, where all the morning. At noon home to dinner,
where Mr. Goodgroome and Creed, and I have great hopes that my wife
will come to sing to my mind. After dinner my wife and Creed and I being
entered a hackney coach to go to the other end of the town, we espied
The. Turner coming in her coach to see us, which we were surprised at,
and so ‘light and took her and another young lady home, and there sat
and talked with The., she being lately come out of the North after two
or three years absence. She is come to put out her sister and brothers
to school at Putney. After a little talk, I over Tower Hill with them to
a lady’s they go to visit, and so away with my wife, whose being dressed
this day in fair hair did make me so mad, that I spoke not one word to
her in our going, though I was ready to burst with anger. So to White
Hall to the Committee of Tangier, where they were discoursing about laws
for the civil government of the place, but so dull and so little to the
purpose that I fell to slumber, when the fear of being seen by Sir W.
Coventry did trouble me much afterwards, but I hope he did not. After
that broke up. Creed and I into the Park, and walked, a most pleasant
evening, and so took coach, and took up my wife, and in my way home
discovered my trouble to my wife for her white locks,

     [Randle Holmes says the ladies wore “false locks set on wyres, to
     make them stand at a distance from the head,” and accompanies the
     information with the figure of a lady “with a pair of locks and
     curls which were in great fashion in 1670” (Planche’s “Cyclopaedia
     of Costume;” Vol. i., p. 248).]

swearing by God, several times, which I pray God forgive me for, and
bending my fist, that I would not endure it. She, poor wretch,

     [A new light is thrown upon this favourite expression of Pepys’s
     when speaking of his wife by the following quotation from a Midland
     wordbook: “Wretch, n., often used as an expression of endearment or
     sympathy.  Old Woman to Young Master: ‘An’ ‘ow is the missis to-day,
     door wretch?’  Of a boy going to school a considerable distance off
     ‘I met ‘im with a bit o’ bread in ‘is bag, door wretch’” (“A
     Glossary of Words and Phrases used in S.E. Worcestershire,” by Jesse
     Salisbury.  Published by the English Dialect Society, 1894).]

was surprized with it, and made me no answer all the way home; but there
we parted, and I to the office late, and then home, and without supper
to bed, vexed.