11th. By coach to White Hall, and there attended the Duke of York, as we
are wont, who is now grown pretty well, and goes up and down White Hall,
and this night will be at the Council, which I am glad of. Thence to
Westminster Hall, and there walked most of the morning, and among others
did there meet my cozen Roger Pepys, who intends to go to Impington on
this day s’ennight, the Parliament break up the night before. Here I met
Rolt and Sir John Chichly, and Harris, the player, and there we talked
of many things, and particularly of “Catiline,” which is to be suddenly
acted at the King’s house; and there all agree that it cannot be well
done at that house, there not being good actors enow: and Burt’ acts
Cicero, which they all conclude he will not be able to do well. The
King gives them L500 for robes, there being, as they say, to be sixteen
scarlett robes. Thence home to dinner, and would have had Harris home
with me, but it was too late for him to get to the playhouse after it,
and so home to dinner, and spent the afternoon talking with my wife and
people at home till the evening, and then comes Sir W. Warren to talk
about some business of his and mine: and he, I find, would have me not
to think that the Parliament, in the mind they are in, and having so
many good offices in their view to dispose of, will leave any of the
King’s officers in, but will rout all, though I am likely to escape as
well as any, if any can escape; and I think he is in the right, and I do
look for it accordingly. Then we fell to discourse of my little vessel,
“The Maybolt,” and he thinks that it will be best for me to employ her
for a voyage to Newcastle for coles, they being now dear, and the voyage
not long, nor dangerous yet; and I think I shall go near to do so. Then,
talking of his business, I away to the office, where very busy, and
thither comes Sir W. Pen, and he and I walked together in the garden,
and there told me what passed to-day with him in the Committee, by my
Lord Sandwich’s breaking bulk of the prizes; and he do seem to me that
he hath left it pretty well understood by them, he saying that what
my Lord did was done at the desire, and with the advice, of the chief
officers of the fleete, and that it was no more than admirals heretofore
have done in like cases, which, if it be true that he said it, is very
well, and did please me well. He being gone, I to my office again and
there late, and so weary home.