11th. Up, and to my office, where alone all the morning. About noon
comes to me my cousin Sarah, and my aunt Livett, newly come out of
Gloucestershire, good woman, and come to see me; I took them home, and
made them drink, but they would not stay dinner, I being alone. But here
they tell me that they hear that this day Kate Joyce was to be married
to a man called Hollingshed, whom she indeed did once tell me of, and
desired me to enquire after him. But, whatever she said of his being
rich, I do fear, by her doing this without my advice, it is not as it
ought to be; but, as she brews, let her bake. They being gone, I to
dinner with Balty and his wife, who is come to town to-day from Deptford
to see us, and after dinner I out and took a coach, and called Mercer,
and she and I to the Duke of York’s playhouse, and there saw “The
Tempest,” and between two acts, I went out to Mr. Harris, and got him to
repeat to me the words of the Echo, while I writ them down, having tried
in the play to have wrote them; but, when I had done it, having done it
without looking upon my paper, I find I could not read the blacklead.
But now I have got the words clear, and, in going in thither, had the
pleasure to see the actors in their several dresses, especially the
seamen and monster, which were very droll: so into the play again. But
there happened one thing which vexed me, which is, that the orange-woman
did come in the pit, and challenge me for twelve oranges, which she
delivered by my order at a late play, at night, to give to some ladies
in a box, which was wholly untrue, but yet she swore it to be true. But,
however, I did deny it, and did not pay her; but, for quiet, did buy 4s.
worth of oranges of her, at 6d. a-piece. Here I saw first my Lord Ormond
since his coming from Ireland, which is now about eight days. After the
play done, I took Mercer by water to Spring Garden; and there with great
pleasure walked, and eat, and drank, and sang, making people come about
us, to hear us, and two little children of one of our neighbours that
happened to be there, did come into our arbour, and we made them dance
prettily. So by water, with great pleasure, down to the Bridge, and
there landed, and took water again on the other side; and so to the
Tower, and I saw her home, I myself home to my chamber, and by and by to
bed.