14th. Up, and by water to White Hall and St. James’s, and to see Sir
W. Coventry, and discourse about business of our Office, telling him my
trouble there, to see how things are ordered. I told him also what Cocke
told me the other day, but he says there is not much in it, though he do
know that this hath been in the eye of some persons to compass for the
turning all things in the navy, and that it looks so like a popular
thing as that he thinks something may be done in it, but whether so
general or no, as I tell it him, he knows not. Thence to White Hall, and
there wait at the Council-chamber door a good while, talking with one or
other, and so home by water, though but for a little while, because I
am to return to White Hall. At home I find Symson, putting up my new
chimney-piece, in our great chamber, which is very fine, but will cost
a great deal of money, but it is not flung away. So back to White Hall,
and after the council up, I with Mr. Wren, by invitation, to Sir Stephen
Fox’s to dinner, where the Cofferer and Sir Edward Savage; where many
good stories of the antiquity and estates of many families at this day
in Cheshire, and that part of the kingdom, more than what is on this
side, near London. My Lady [Fox] dining with us; a very good lady, and a
family governed so nobly and neatly as do me good to see it. Thence the
Cofferer, Sir Stephen, and I to the Commissioners of the Treasury about
business: and so I up to the Duke of York, who enquired for what I had
promised him, about my observations of the miscarriages of our Office;

     [This refers to the letter on the affairs of the office which Pepys
     prepared, and respecting which, and the proceedings which grew out
     of it, so many references are made in future pages of the Diary.]

and I told him he should have it next week, being glad he called for
it; for I find he is concerned to do something, and to secure himself
thereby, I believe: for the world is labouring to eclipse him, I
doubt; I mean, the factious part of the Parliament. The Office met this
afternoon as usual, and waited on him; where, among other things, he
talked a great while of his intentions of going to Dover soon, to be
sworn as Lord Warden, which is a matter of great ceremony and state,
and so to the Temple with Mr. Wren, to the Attorney’s chamber, about
business, but he abroad, and so I home, and there spent the evening
talking with my wife and piping, and pleased with our chimney-piece, and
so to bed.