8th. Up, and to the office, where busy all the morning. Towards noon I
to Westminster and there understand that the Lords’ House did sit till
eleven o’clock last night, about the business in difference between them
and the Commons, in the matter of the East India Company. Here took a
turn or two, and up to my Lord Crew’s, and there dined; where Mr. Case,
the minister, a dull fellow in his talk, and all in the Presbyterian
manner; a great deal of noise and a kind of religious tone, but very
dull. After dinner my Lord and I together. He tells me he hears that
there are great disputes like to be at Court, between the factions of
the two women, my Lady Castlemayne and Mrs. Stewart, who is now well
again, and the King hath made several public visits to her, and like to
come to Court: the other is to go to Barkeshire-house, which is taken
for her, and they say a Privy-Seal is passed for L5000 for it. He
believes all will come to ruin. Thence I to White Hall, where the Duke
of York gone to the Lords’ House, where there is to be a conference on
the Lords’ side to the Commons this afternoon, giving in their Reasons,
which I would have been at, but could not; for, going by direction to
the Prince’s chamber, there Brouncker, W. Pen, and Mr. Wren, and I, met,
and did our business with the Duke of York. But, Lord! to see how this
play of Sir Positive At-all,--[“The Impertinents.”]--in abuse of Sir
Robert Howard, do take, all the Duke’s and every body’s talk being of
that, and telling more stories of him, of the like nature, that it is
now the town and country talk, and, they say, is most exactly true. The
Duke of York himself said that of his playing at trap-ball is true, and
told several other stories of him. This being done, Brouncker, Pen,
and I to Brouncker’s house, and there sat and talked, I asking many
questions in mathematics to my Lord, which he do me the pleasure to
satisfy me in, and here we drank and so spent an hour, and so W. Pen and
I home, and after being with W. Pen at his house an hour, I home and to
bed.