21st. Up, and while at the office comes news from Kate Joyce that if I
would see her husband alive, I must come presently. So, after the office
was up, I to him, and W. Hewer with me, and find him in his sick bed (I
never was at their house, this Inne, before) very sensible in discourse
and thankful for my kindness to him, and his breath rattled in his
throate, and they did lay pigeons to his feet while I was in the house,
and all despair of him, and with good reason. But the story is that
it seems on Thursday last he went sober and quiet out of doors in the
morning to Islington, and behind one of the inns, the White Lion, did
fling himself into a pond, was spied by a poor woman and got out by some
people binding up hay in a barn there, and set on his head and got to
life, and known by a woman coming that way; and so his wife and friends
sent for. He confessed his doing the thing, being led by the Devil; and
do declare his reason to be, his trouble that he found in having forgot
to serve God as he ought, since he come to this new employment: and I
believe that, and the sense of his great loss by the fire, did bring him
to it, and so everybody concludes. He stayed there all that night, and
come home by coach next morning, and there grew sick, and worse and
worse to this day. I stayed awhile among the friends that were there,
and they being now in fear that the goods and estate would be seized
on, though he lived all this while, because of his endeavouring to drown
himself, my cozen did endeavour to remove what she could of plate out of
the house, and desired me to take my flagons; which I was glad of, and
did take them away with me in great fear all the way of being seized;
though there was no reason for it, he not being dead, but yet so fearful
I was. So home, and there eat my dinner, and busy all the afternoon, and
troubled at this business. In the evening with Sir D. Gawden, to Guild
Hall, to advise with the Towne-Clerke about the practice of the City and
nation in this case: and he thinks that it cannot be found self-murder;
but if it be, it will fall, all the estate, to the King. So we parted,
and I to my cozens again; where I no sooner come but news was brought
down from his chamber that he was departed. So, at their entreaty, I
presently took coach to White Hall, and there find Sir W. Coventry; and
he carried me to the King, the Duke of York being with him, and there
told my story which I had told him:

     [This was not the only time that Pepys took trouble to save the
     estate of a friend who had committed suicide.  In the “Caveat Book”
      in the Record Office, p. 42 of the volume for 1677, is the following
     entry: “That no grant pass of the Estate of Francis Gurney of Maldon
     in Essex, who drowned himself in his own well on Tuesday night ye