4th. Up, and by coach to White Hall; and there I find the King and Duke
of York come the last night, and every body’s mouth full of my Lord
Anglesey’s suspension being sealed; which it was, it seems, yesterday;
so that he is prevented in his remedy at the Council; and, it seems, the
two new Treasurers did kiss the King’s hand this morning, brought in by
my Lord Arlington. They walked up and down together the Court this day,
and several people joyed them; but I avoided it, that I might not be
seen to look either way. This day also I hear that my Lord Ormond is
to be declared in Council no more Deputy Governor of Ireland, his
commission being expired: and the King is prevailed with to take it out
of his hands; which people do mightily admire, saying that he is the
greatest subject of any prince in Christendome, and hath more acres of
land than any, and hath done more for his Prince than ever any yet did.
But all will not do; he must down, it seems, the Duke of Buckingham
carrying all before him. But that, that troubles me most is, that
they begin to talk that the Duke of York’s regiment is ordered to be
disbanded; and more, that undoubtedly his Admiralty will follow: which
do shake me mightily, and I fear will have ill consequences in the
nation, for these counsels are very mad. The Duke of York do, by all
men’s report, carry himself wonderfull submissive to the King, in the
most humble manner in the world; but yet, it seems, nothing must be
spared that tends to, the keeping out of the Chancellor; and that is
the reason of all this. The great discourse now is, that the Parliament
shall be dissolved and another called, which shall give the King the
Deane and Chapter lands; and that will put him out of debt. And it
is said that Buckingham do knownly meet daily with Wildman and other
Commonwealth-men; and that when he is with them, he makes the King
believe that he is with his wenches; and something looks like the
Parliament’s being dissolved, by Harry Brouncker’s being now come back,
and appears this day the first day at White Hall; but hath not been yet
with the King, but is secure that he shall be well received, I hear. God
bless us, when such men as he shall be restored! But that, that pleases
me most is, that several do tell me that Pen is to be removed; and
others, that he hath resigned his place; and particularly Spragg tells
me for certain that he hath resigned it, and is become a partner with
Gawden in the Victualling: in which I think he hath done a very cunning
thing; but I am sure I am glad of it; and it will be well for the King
to have him out of this Office. Thence by coach, doing several errands,
home and there to dinner, and then to the Office, where all the
afternoon till late at night, and so home. Deb. hath been abroad to-day
with her friends, poor girle, I believe toward the getting of a place.
This day a boy is sent me out of the country from Impington by my cozen
Roger Pepys’ getting, whom I visited this morning at his chamber in the
Strand and carried him to Westminster Hall, where I took a turn or
two with him and Sir John Talbot, who talks mighty high for my Lord of
Ormond: and I perceive this family of the Talbots hath been raised by my
Lord. When I come home to-night I find Deb. not come home, and do doubt
whether she be not quite gone or no, but my wife is silent to me in it,
and I to her, but fell to other discourse, and indeed am well satisfied
that my house will never be at peace between my wife and I unless I let
her go, though it grieves me to the heart. My wife and I spent much time
this evening talking of our being put out of the Office, and my going to
live at Deptford at her brother’s, till I can clear my accounts, and rid
my hands of the town, which will take me a year or more, and I do think
it will be best for me to do so, in order to our living cheap, and out
of sight.