14th. Up very betimes, and with Jane to Levett’s, there to conclude upon
our dinner; and thence to the pewterer’s, to buy a pewter sesterne,

     [A pewter cistern was formerly part of the furniture of a well-
     appointed dining-room; the plates were rinsed in it, when necessary,
     during the meal.  A magnificent silver cistern is still preserved in
     the dining-room at Burghley House, the seat of the Marquis of
     Exeter.  It is said to be the largest piece of plate in England, and
     was once the subject of a curious wager.--B.]

which I have ever hitherto been without, and so up and down upon several
occasions to set matters in order, and that being done I out of doors to
Westminster Hall, and there met my Lord Brouncker, who tells me that
our business is put off till Monday, and so I was mighty glad that I was
eased of my attendance here, and of any occasion that might put me out
of humour, as it is likely if we had been called before the Parliament.
Therefore, after having spoke with Mr. Godolphin and cozen Roger, I away
home, and there do find everything in mighty good order, only my wife
not dressed, which troubles me. Anon comes my company, viz., my Lord
Hinchingbroke and his lady, Sir Philip Carteret and his, lady, Godolphin
and my cozen Roger, and Creed: and mighty merry; and by and by to
dinner, which was very good and plentifull: (I should have said, and Mr.
George Montagu), who come at a very little warning, which was exceeding
kind of him. And there, among other things, my Lord had Sir Samuel
Morland’s late invention for casting up of sums of L. s. d.;

     [The same as Morland’s so-called calculating machine.  Sir Samuel
     published in 1673 “The Description and Use of two Arithmetick
     Instruments, together with a short Treatise of Arithmetic, as
     likewise a Perpetual Almanack and severall useful tables.”]

which is very pretty, but not very useful. Most of our discourse was of
my Lord Sandwich and his family, as being all of us of the family; and
with extraordinary pleasure all the afternoon, thus together eating
and looking over my closet: and my Lady Hinchingbroke I find a very
sweet-natured and well-disposed lady, a lover of books and pictures, and
of good understanding. About five o’clock they went; and then my wife
and I abroad by coach into Moorefields, only for a little ayre, and so
home again, staying no where, and then up to her chamber, there to talk
with pleasure of this day’s passages, and so to bed. This day I had the
welcome news of our prize being come safe from Holland, so as I shall
have hopes, I hope, of getting my money of my Lady Batten, or good part
of it.