24th. Up betimes, and by water to White Hall, to the Duke of York,
and there hear that this day Hopis and Temple purpose to bring in the
petition against Sir W. Coventry, which I am sorry for, but hope he will
get out of it. Here I presented Mrs. Pett and her condition to Mr. Wren
for his favour, which he promised us. Thence to Lord Brouncker and sat
and talked with him, who thinks the Parliament will, by their violence
and delay in money matters, force the King to run any hazard, and
dissolve them. Thence to Ducke Lane, and there did overlook a great many
of Monsieur Fouquet’s library, that a bookseller hath bought, and I did
buy one Spanish [work], “Los Illustres Varones.”

     [Nicholas Fouquet, “Surintendant des Finances” in France, had built
     at Vaux a house which surpassed in magnificence any palace belonging
     to Louis XIV., prior to the erection of Versailles, and caused much
     envy to all the Court, especially to Colbert.  Fouquet died at
     Pignerol in 1680, after nineteen years’ incarceration; and whilst
     Pepys was buying his books in London, Colbert had become prime
     minister in France, and Colbert’s brother ambassador in England.
     The ‘viper’ had caught the ‘squirrel’!--B.]

Here did I endeavour to see my pretty woman that I did baiser in las
tenebras a little while depuis. And did find her sofa in the book[shop],
but had not la confidence para alter a elle. So lost my pains. But will
another time, and so home and to my office, and then to dinner. After
dinner down to the Old Swan, and by the way called at Michell’s, and
there did see Betty, and that was all, for either she is shy or foolish,
and su mardi hath no mind para laiser me see su moher. To White Hall by
water, and there did our business with the Duke of York, which was
very little, only here I do hear the Duke of York tell how Sir W. Pen’s
impeachment was brought into the House of Lords to-day; and spoke with
great kindness of him: and that the Lords would not commit him till they
could find precedent for it, and did incline to favour him. Thence to
the King’s playhouse, and there saw a piece of “Beggar’s Bush,” which I
have not seen some years, and thence home, and there to Sir W. Pen’s and
supped and sat talking there late, having no where else to go, and my
eyes too bad to read right, and so home to bed.