16th. Up; and dressing myself I did begin para toker the breasts of my
maid Jane, which elle did give way to more than usual heretofore, so I
have a design to try more when I can bring it to. So to the office, and
thence to St. James’s to the Duke of York, walking it to the Temple,
and in my way observe that the Stockes are now pulled quite down; and
it will make the coming into Cornhill and Lumber Street mighty noble. I
stopped, too, at Paul’s, and there did go into St. Fayth’s Church, and
also in the body of the west part of the Church; and do see a hideous
sight of the walls of the Church ready to fall, that I was in fear as
long as I was in it: and here I saw the great vaults underneath the body
of the Church. No hurt, I hear, is done yet, since their going to pull
down the Church and steeple; but one man, on Monday this week, fell from
the top to a piece of the roof, of the east end, that stands next the
steeple, and there broke himself all to pieces. It is pretty here to see
how the late Church was but a case wrought over the old Church; for you
may see the very old pillars standing whole within the wall of this.
When I come to St. James’s, I find the Duke of York gone with the King
to see the muster of the Guards in Hyde Park; and their Colonel, the
Duke of Monmouth, to take his command this day of the King’s Life-Guard,
by surrender of my Lord Gerard. So I took a hackney-coach and saw it
all: and indeed it was mighty noble, and their firing mighty fine, and
the Duke of Monmouth in mighty rich clothes; but the well-ordering
of the men I understand not. Here, among a thousand coaches that were
there, I saw and spoke to Mrs. Pierce: and by and by Mr. Wren hunts
me out, and gives me my Lord Anglesey’s answer to the Duke of York’s
letter, where, I perceive, he do do what he can to hurt me, by bidding
the Duke of York call for my books: but this will do me all the right
in the world, and yet I am troubled at it. So away out of the Park, and
home; and there Mr. Gibson and I to dinner: and all the afternoon with
him, writing over anew, and a little altering, my answer to the Duke
of York, which I have not yet delivered, and so have the opportunity of
doing it after seeing all their answers, though this do give me occasion
to alter very little. This done, he to write it over, and I to the
Office, where late, and then home; and he had finished it; and then he
to read to me the life of Archbishop Laud, wrote by Dr. Heylin; which is
a shrewd book, but that which I believe will do the Bishops in general
no great good, but hurt, it pleads for so much Popish. So after supper
to bed. This day my father’s letters tell me of the death of poor Fancy,
in the country, big with puppies, which troubles me, as being one of my
oldest acquaintances and servants. Also good Stankes is dead.