March 1st (Lord’s day). Up very betimes, and by coach to Sir W.
Coventry’s; and there, largely carrying with me all my notes and papers,
did run over our whole defence in the business of tickets, in order to
the answering the House on Thursday next; and I do think, unless they be
set without reason to ruin us, we shall make a good defence. I find him
in great anxiety, though he will not discover it, in the business of the
proceedings of Parliament; and would as little as is possible have his
name mentioned in our discourse to them; and particularly the business
of selling places is now upon his hand to defend himself in; wherein I
did help him in his defence about the flag-maker’s place, which is named
in the House. We did here do the like about the complaint of want of
victuals in the fleete in the year 1666, which will lie upon me to
defend also. So that my head is full of care and weariness in my
employment. Thence home, and there my mind being a little lightened by
my morning’s work in the arguments I have now laid together in better
method for our defence to the Parliament, I to talk with my wife; and in
lieu of a coach this year, I have got my wife to be contented with her
closet being made up this summer, and going into the country this summer
for a month or two, to my father’s, and there Mercer and Deb. and Jane
shall go with her, which I the rather do for the entertaining my wife,
and preventing of fallings out between her and my father or Deb., which
uses to be the fate of her going into the country. After dinner by coach
to Westminster, and there to St. Margaret’s church, thinking to have
seen Betty Michell, but she was not there, but met her father and mother
and with them to her father’s house, where I never was before, but was
mighty much made of, with some good strong waters, which they have
from their son Michell, and mighty good people they are. Thence to
Mrs. Martin’s, where I have not been also a good while, and with great
difficulty, company being there, did get an opportunity to hazer what I
would con her, and here I was mightily taken with a starling which
she hath, that was the King’s, which he kept in his bedchamber; and
do whistle and talk the most and best that ever I heard anything in my
life. Thence to visit Sir H. Cholmly, who continues still sick of his
cold, and thence calling, but in vain, to speak with Sir G. Carteret at
his house in Lincoln’s Inn Fields, where I spoke with nobody, but home,
where spent the evening talking with W. Hewer about business of the
House, and declaring my expectation of all our being turned out. Hither
comes Carcasse to me about business, and there did confess to me of his
own accord his having heretofore discovered as a complaint against Sir
W. Batten, Sir W. Pen and me that we did prefer the paying of some men
to man “The Flying Greyhound” to others, by order under our hands. The
thing upon recollection I believe is true, and do hope no great matter
can be made of it, but yet I would be glad to have my name out of it,
which I shall labour to do; in the mean time it weighs as a new trouble
on my mind, and did trouble me all night. So without supper to bed, my
eyes being also a little overwrought of late that I could not stay up to
read.