15th (Lord’s day). Up and walked, it being fine dry weather, to Sir W.
Coventry’s, overtaking my boy Ely (that was), and he walked with me,
being grown a man, and I think a sober fellow. He parted at Charing
Cross, and I to Sir W. Coventry’s, and there talked with him about the
Commissioners of Accounts, who did give in their report yesterday to the
House, and do lay little upon us as aggravate any thing at present, but
only do give an account of the dissatisfactory account they receive from
Sir G. Carteret, which I am sorry for, they saying that he tells them
not any time when he paid any sum, which is fit for them to know for
the computing of interest, but I fear he is hardly able to tell it. They
promise to give them an account of the embezzlement of prizes, wherein
I shall be something concerned, but nothing that I am afeard of, I thank
God. Thence walked with W. Coventry into the Park, and there met the
King and the Duke of York, and walked a good while with them: and here
met Sir Jer. Smith, who tells me he is like to get the better of Holmes,
and that when he is come to an end of that, he will do Hollis’s business
for him, in the House, for his blasphemies, which I shall be glad of. So
to White Hall, and there walked with this man and that man till chapel
done, and, the King dined and then Sir Thomas Clifford, the Comptroller,
took me with him to dinner to his lodgings, where my Lord Arlington and
a great deal of good and great company; where I very civilly used by
them, and had a most excellent dinner: and good discourse of Spain, Mr.
Godolphin being there; particularly of the removal of the bodies of all
the dead Kings of Spain that could be got together, and brought to the
Pantheon at the Escuriall, when it was finished, and there placed before
the altar, there to lie for ever; and there was a sermon made to them
upon this text, “Arida ossa, audite verbum Dei;” and a most eloquent
sermon, as they say, who say they have read it. After dinner, away
hence, and I to Mrs. Martin’s, and there spent the afternoon, and did
hazer con elle, and here was her sister and Mrs. Burrows, and so in the
evening got a coach and home, and there find Mr. Pelting and W. Hewer,
and there talked and supped, Pelting being gone, and mightily pleased
with a picture that W. Hewer brought hither of several things painted
upon a deale board, which board is so well painted that in my whole
life I never was so well pleased or surprized with any picture, and so
troubled that so good pictures should be painted upon a piece of bad
deale. Even after I knew that it was not board, but only the picture of
a board, I could not remove my fancy. After supper to bed, being very
sleepy, and, I bless God, my mind being at very good present rest.