25th. Waked betimes, and lay long.... and there fell to talking, and by
and by rose, it being the first fair day, and yet not quite fair, that
we have had some time, and so up, and to walk with my father again in
the garden, consulting what to do with him and this house when Pall and
her husband go away; and I think it will be to let it, and he go live
with her, though I am against letting the house for any long time,
because of having it to retire to, ourselves. So I do intend to think
more of it before I resolve. By and by comes Mr. Cooke to see me and so
spent the morning, and he gone by and by at noon to dinner, where Mr.
Shepley come and we merry, all being in good humour between my wife and
her people about her, and after dinner took horse, I promising to fetch
her away about fourteen days hence, and so calling all of us, we men on
horseback, and the women and my father, at Goody Gorum’s, and there in
a frolic drinking I took leave, there going with me and my boy, my two
brothers, and one Browne, whom they call in mirth Colonell, for our
guide, and also Mr. Shepley, to the end of Huntingdon, and another
gentleman who accidentally come thither, one Mr. Castle; and I made them
drink at the Chequers, where I observed the same tapster, Tom, that was
there when I was a little boy and so we, at the end of the town, took
leave of Shepley and the other gentleman, and so we away and got well to
Cambridge, about seven to the Rose, the waters not being now so high as
before. And here ‘lighting, I took my boy and two brothers, and walked
to Magdalene College: and there into the butterys, as a stranger, and
there drank my bellyfull of their beer, which pleased me, as the best I
ever drank: and hear by the butler’s man, who was son to Goody Mulliner
over against the College, that we used to buy stewed prunes of,
concerning the College and persons in it; and find very few, only Mr.
Hollins and Pechell, I think, that were of my time. But I was mightily
pleased to come in this condition to see and ask, and thence, giving the
fellow something, away walked to Chesterton, to see our old walk, and
there into the Church, the bells ringing, and saw the place I used to
sit in, and so to the ferry, and ferried over to the other side, and
walked with great pleasure, the river being mighty high by Barnewell
Abbey: and so by Jesus College to the town, and so to our quarters, and
to supper, and then to bed, being very weary and sleepy and mightily
pleased with this night’s walk.