5th. Up, and all the morning at the office. At noon home to dinner
and Creed with me, and after dinner he and I to the Duke of York’s
playhouse; and there coming late, he and I up to the balcony-box, where
we find my Lady Castlemayne and several great ladies; and there we sat
with them, and I saw “The Impertinents” once more, now three times, and
the three only days it hath been acted. And to see the folly how the
house do this day cry up the play more than yesterday! and I for that
reason like it, I find, the better, too; by Sir Positive At-all, I
understand, is meant Sir Robert Howard. My Lady [Castlemaine] pretty
well pleased with it; but here I sat close to her fine woman, Willson,
who indeed is very handsome, but, they say, with child by the King. I
asked, and she told me this was the first time her Lady had seen it,
I having a mind to say something to her. One thing of familiarity I
observed in my Lady Castlemayne: she called to one of her women, another
that sat by this, for a little patch off her face, and put it into her
mouth and wetted it, and so clapped it upon her own by the side of her
mouth, I suppose she feeling a pimple rising there. Thence with Creed
to Westminster Hall, and there met with cozen Roger, who tells me of
the great conference this day between the Lords and Commons, about
the business of the East India Company, as being one of the weightiest
conferences that hath been, and managed as weightily. I am heartily
sorry I was not there, it being upon a mighty point of the privileges
of the subjects of England, in regard to the authority of the House of
Lords, and their being condemned by them as the Supreme Court, which, we
say, ought not to be, but by appeal from other Courts. And he tells
me that the Commons had much the better of them, in reason and history
there quoted, and believes the Lords will let it fall. Thence to walk in
the Hall, and there hear that Mrs. Martin’s child, my god-daughter,
is dead, and so by water to the Old Swan, and thence home, and there a
little at Sir W. Pen’s, and so to bed.