29th. Up, and to my office, where all the morning busy. At noon dined
at home, and my clerks with me, and thence I to White Hall, and there
do hear how Sir W. Pen hath delivered in his answer; and the Lords have
sent it down to the Commons, but they have not yet read it, nor taken
notice of it, so as, I believe, they will by design defer it till they
rise, that so he, by lying under an impeachment, may be prevented in
his going to sea, which will vex him, and trouble the Duke of York. Did
little business with the Duke of York, and then Lord Brouncker and I to
the Duke of York’s playhouse, and there saw “Love in a Tubb;” and, after
the play done, I stepped up to Harris’s dressing-room, where I never
was, and there I observe much company come to him, and the Witts, to
talk, after the play is done, and to assign meetings. Mine was to talk
about going down to see “The Resolution,” and so away, and thence to
Westminster Hall, and there met with Mr. G. Montagu, and walked and
talked; who tells me that the best fence against the Parliament’s
present fury is delay, and recommended it to me, in my friends’ business
and my own, if I have any; and is that, that Sir W. Coventry do take,
and will secure himself; that the King will deliver up all to the
Parliament; and being petitioned the other day by Mr. Brouncker to
protect him, with teares in his eyes, the King did say he could not, and
bid him shift for himself, at least till the House is up. Thence I away
to White Hall, and there took coach home with a stranger I let into the
coach, to club with me for it, he going into London, I set him down at
the lower end of Cheapside, and I home, and to Sir W. Pen’s, and there
sat, and by and by, it being now about nine o’clock at night, I heard
Mercer’s voice, and my boy Tom’s singing in the garden, which pleased me
mightily, I longing to see the girl, having not seen her since my wife
went; and so into the garden to her and sang, and then home to supper,
and mightily pleased with her company, in talking and singing, and so
parted, and to bed.