22nd. Up, and all the morning at my office busy. At noon, it being
washing day, I toward White Hall, and stopped and dined all alone at
Hercules Pillars, where I was mighty pleased to overhear a woman talk
to her counsel how she had troubled her neighbours with law, and did it
very roguishly and wittily. Thence to White Hall, and there we attended
the Duke of York as usual; and I did present Mrs. Pett, the widow, and
her petition to the Duke of York, for some relief from the King.
Here was to-day a proposition made to the Duke of York by Captain Von
Hemskirke for L20,000, to discover an art how to make a ship go two foot
for one what any ship do now, which the King inclines to try, it costing
him nothing to try; and it is referred to us to contract with the man.
Thence to attend the Council about the business of certificates to the
Exchequer, where the Commissioners of the Treasury of different minds,
some would, and my Lord Ashly would not have any more made out, and
carried it there should not. After done here, and the Council up, I by
water from the Privy-stairs to Westminster Hall; and, taking water, the
King and the Duke of York were in the new buildings; and the Duke of
York called to me whither I was going? and I answered aloud, “To wait on
our maisters at Westminster;” at which he and all the company
laughed; but I was sorry and troubled for it afterwards, for fear any
Parliament-man should have been there; and will be a caution to me for
the time to come. Met with Roger Pepys, who tells me they have been on
the business of money, but not ended yet, but will take up more time.
So to the fishmonger’s, and bought a couple of lobsters, and over to
the ‘sparagus garden, thinking to have met Mr. Pierce, and his wife
and Knepp; but met their servant coming to bring me to Chatelin’s, the
French house, in Covent Garden, and there with musick and good company,
Manuel and his wife, and one Swaddle, a clerk of Lord Arlington’s, who
dances, and speaks French well, but got drunk, and was then troublesome,
and here mighty merry till ten at night, and then I away, and got a
coach, and so home, where I find Balty and his wife come to town, and
did sup with them, and so they to bed. This night the Duke of Monmouth
and a great many blades were at Chatelin’s, and I left them there, with
a hackney-coach attending him.