17th. Up, and by coach to White Hall to attend the Council there, and
here I met first by Mr. Castle the shipwright, whom I met there, and
then from the whole house the discourse of the duell yesterday between
the Duke of Buckingham, Holmes, and one Jenkins, on one side, and my
Lord of Shrewsbury, Sir John Talbot, and one Bernard Howard, on the
other side: and all about my Lady Shrewsbury,

     [Anna Maria, daughter of Robert Brudenel, second Earl of Cardigan.
     Walpole says she held the Duke of Buckingham’s horse, in the habit
     of a page, while he was fighting the duel with her husband.  She
     married, secondly, George Rodney Bridges, son of Sir Thomas Bridges
     of Keynsham, Somerset, Groom of the Bedchamber to Charles IL, and
     died April 20th, 1702.  A portrait of the Countess of Shrewsbury, as
     Minerva, by Lely.]

who is a whore, and is at this time, and hath for a great while been, a
whore to the Duke of Buckingham. And so her husband challenged him, and
they met yesterday in a close near Barne-Elmes, and there fought: and my
Lord Shrewsbury is run through the body, from the right breast through
the shoulder: and Sir John Talbot all along up one of his armes; and
Jenkins killed upon the place, and the rest all, in a little measure,
wounded. This will make the world think that the King hath good
councillors about him, when the Duke of Buckingham, the greatest man
about him, is a fellow of no more sobriety than to fight about a whore.
And this may prove a very bad accident to the Duke of Buckingham, but
that my Lady Castlemayne do rule all at this time as much as ever she
did, and she will, it is believed, keep all matters well with the
Duke of Buckingham: though this is a time that the King will be very
backward, I suppose, to appear in such a business. And it is pretty to
hear how the King had some notice of this challenge a week or two
ago, and did give it to my Lord Generall to confine the Duke, or take
security that he should not do any such thing as fight: and the Generall
trusted to the King that he, sending for him, would do it, and the King
trusted to the Generall; and so, between both, as everything else of the
greatest moment do, do fall between two stools. The whole House full
of nothing but the talk of this business; and it is said that my Lord
Shrewsbury’s case is to be feared, that he may die too; and that may
make it much the worse for the Duke of Buckingham: and I shall not be
much sorry for it, that we may have some sober man come in his room
to assist in the Government. Here I waited till the Council rose, and
talked the while, with Creed, who tells me of Mr. Harry Howard’s’
giving the Royal Society a piece of ground next to his house, to build
a College on, which is a most generous act. And he tells me he is a
very fine person, and understands and speaks well; and no rigid Papist
neither, but one that would not have a Protestant servant leave his
religion, which he was going to do, thinking to recommend himself to his
master by it; saying that he had rather have an honest Protestant than
a knavish Catholique. I was not called into the Council; and, therefore,
home, first informing myself that my Lord Hinchingbroke hath been
married this week to my Lord Burlington’s daughter; so that that great
business is over; and I mighty glad of it, though I am not satisfied
that I have not a Favour sent me, as I see Attorney Montagu and the
Vice-Chamberlain have. But I am mighty glad that the thing is done. So
home, and there alone with my wife and Deb. to dinner, and after dinner
comes Betty Turner, and I carried them to the New Exchange, and thence
I to White Hall and did a little business at the Treasury, and so called
them there, and so home and to cards and supper, and her mother come
and sat at cards with us till past 12 at night, and then broke up and to
bed, after entering my journall, which made it one before I went to bed.