6th. Up, and to St. James’s, and there attended the Duke of York, and
was there by himself told how angry he was, and did declare to my Lord
Anglesey, about his late complaining of things of the Navy to the King
in Council, and not to him; and I perceive he is mightily concerned
at it, and resolved to reform things therein. Thence with W. Coventry
walked in the Park together a good while, he mighty kind to me. And hear
many pretty stories of my Lord Chancellor’s being heretofore made sport
of by Peter Talbot the priest, in his story of the death of Cardinall
Bleau;

     [It is probable these stories, in ridicule of Clarendon, are nowhere
     recorded.  Cardinal Jean Balue was the minister of Louis XI. of
     France.  The reader will remember him in Sir W. Scott’s “Quentin
     Durward.”  He was confined for eleven years in an iron cage invented
     by himself in the Chateau de Loches, and died soon after he regained
     his liberty.--B.]

by Lord Cottington, in his ‘Dolor de las Tyipas’;

     [Gripes.  It was a joke against Lord Cottington that whenever he was
     seriously ill he declared himself a Roman Catholic, when he was well
     again he returned to the Protestant faith.]

and Tom Killigrew, in his being bred in Ram Ally, and now bound prentice
to Lord Cottington, going to Spain with L1000, and two suits of clothes.
Thence home to dinner, and thence to Mr. Cooper’s, and there met my wife
and W. Hewer and Deb.; and there my wife first sat for her picture: but
he is a most admirable workman, and good company. Here comes Harris, and
first told us how Betterton is come again upon the stage: whereupon my
wife and company to the [Duke’s] house to see “Henry the Fifth;” while I
to attend the Duke of York at the Committee of the Navy, at the Council,
where some high dispute between him and W. Coventry about settling
pensions upon all Flag-Officers, while unemployed: W. Coventry against
it, and, I think, with reason. Thence I to the playhouse, and saw a
piece of the play, and glad to see Betterton; and so with wife and Deb.
to Spring-garden, and eat a lobster, and so home in the evening and to
bed. Great doings at Paris, I hear, with their triumphs for their late
conquests! The Duchesse of Richmond sworn last week of the queen’s
Bedchamber, and the King minding little else but what he used to
do--about his women.