5th. With these thoughts I lay troubling myself till six o’clock,
restless, and at last getting my wife to talk to me to comfort me, which
she at last did, and made me resolve to quit my hands of this Office,
and endure the trouble of it no longer than till I can clear myself of
it. So with great trouble, but yet with some ease, from this discourse
with my wife, I up, and to my Office, whither come my clerks, and so I
did huddle the best I could some more notes for my discourse to-day, and
by nine o’clock was ready, and did go down to the Old Swan, and there
by boat, with T. H[ater] and W. H[ewer] with me, to Westminster, where I
found myself come time enough, and my brethren all ready. But I full
of thoughts and trouble touching the issue of this day; and, to comfort
myself, did go to the Dog and drink half-a-pint of mulled sack, and in
the Hall [Westminster] did drink a dram of brandy at Mrs. Hewlett’s; and
with the warmth of this did find myself in better order as to courage,
truly. So we all up to the lobby; and between eleven and twelve o’clock,
were called in, with the mace before us, into the House, where a mighty
full House; and we stood at the bar, namely, Brouncker, Sir J. Minnes,
Sir T. Harvey, and myself, W. Pen being in the House, as a Member.
I perceive the whole House was full, and full of expectation of our
defence what it would be, and with great prejudice. After the Speaker
had told us the dissatisfaction of the House, and read the Report of
the Committee, I began our defence most acceptably and smoothly, and
continued at it without any hesitation or losse, but with full scope,
and all my reason free about me, as if it had been at my own table, from
that time till past three in the afternoon; and so ended, without
any interruption from the Speaker; but we withdrew. And there all
my Fellow-Officers, and all the world that was within hearing, did
congratulate me, and cry up my speech as the best thing they ever heard;
and my Fellow-Officers overjoyed in it; we were called in again by
and by to answer only one question, touching our paying tickets to
ticket-mongers; and so out; and we were in hopes to have had a vote
this day in our favour, and so the generality of the House was; but my
speech, being so long, many had gone out to dinner and come in again
half drunk; and then there are two or three that are professed enemies
to us and every body else; among others, Sir T. Littleton, Sir Thomas
Lee, Mr. Wiles, the coxcomb whom I saw heretofore at the cock-fighting,
and a few others; I say, these did rise up and speak against the coming
to a vote now, the House not being full, by reason of several being
at dinner, but most because that the House was to attend the King this
afternoon, about the business of religion, wherein they pray him to
put in force all the laws against Nonconformists and Papists; and this
prevented it, so that they put it off to to-morrow come se’nnight.
However, it is plain we have got great ground; and everybody says I have
got the most honour that any could have had opportunity of getting; and
so with our hearts mightily overjoyed at this success, we all to dinner
to Lord Brouncker’s--that is to say, myself, T. Harvey, and W. Pen, and
there dined; and thence with Sir Anthony Morgan, who is an acquaintance
of Brouncker’s, a very wise man, we after dinner to the King’s house,
and there saw part of “The Discontented Colonel,” but could take no
great pleasure in it, because of our coming in in the middle of it.
After the play, home with W. Pen, and there to my wife, whom W.
Hewer had told of my success, and she overjoyed, and I also as to my
particular; and, after talking awhile, I betimes to bed, having had no
quiet rest a good while.