24th, 1668: “This day his Majesty was pleased to declare at the
     Board, that whereas, in contemplation of the eminent services
     heretofore done to his Majesty by most of the persons who were
     engaged in the late duel, or rencounter, wherein William Jenkins was
     killed, he Both graciously pardon the said offence: nevertheless, He
     is resolved from henceforth that on no pretence whatsoever any
     pardon shall be hereafter granted to any person whatsoever for
     killing of any man, in any duel or rencounter, but that the course
     of law shall wholly take place in all such cases.”  The warrant for
     a pardon to George, Duke of Buckingham, is dated January 27th, 1668;
     and on the following day was issued, “Warrant for a grant to
     Francis, Earl of Shrewsbury, of pardon for killing William Jenkins,
     and for all duels, assaults, or batteries on George, Duke of
     Buckingham, Sir John Talbot, Sir Robert Holmes, or any other,
     whether indicted or not for the same, with restitution of lands,
     goods, &c.”  (“Calendar of State Papers,” 1667-68, pp. 192,193).]

which he thinks a worse fault than any ill use my late Lord Chancellor
ever put the Great Seal to, and will be so thought by the Parliament,
for them to be pardoned without bringing them to any trial: and that my
Lord Privy-Seal therefore would not have it pass his hand, but made it
go by immediate warrant; or at least they knew that he would not pass
it, and so did direct it to go by immediate warrant, that it might not
come to him. He tells me what a character my Lord Sandwich hath sent
over of Mr. Godolphin, as the worthiest man, and such a friend to him
as he may be trusted in any thing relating to him in the world; as one
whom, he says, he hath infallible assurances that he will remaine his
friend which is very high, but indeed they say the gentleman is a fine
man. Thence, after eating a lobster for my dinner, having eat nothing
to-day, we broke up, here coming to us Mr. Townsend of the Wardrobe, who
complains of the Commissioners of the Treasury as very severe against my
Lord Sandwich, but not so much as they complain of him for a fool and
a knave, and so I let him alone, and home, carrying Mr. Moore as far as
Fenchurch Street, and I home, and there being vexed in my mind about my
prize businesses I to my chamber, where my wife and I had much talk of
W. Hewer, she telling me that he is mightily concerned for my not being
pleased with him, and is herself mightily concerned, but I have
much reason to blame him for his little assistance he gives me in
my business, not being able to copy out a letter with sense or true
spelling that makes me mad, and indeed he is in that regard of as little
use to me as the boy, which troubles me, and I would have him know
it,--and she will let him know it. By and by to supper, and so to bed,
and slept but ill all night, my mind running like a fool on my prize
business, which according to my reason ought not to trouble me at all.