15th. Up, and betimes to White Hall, and there met with Sir H. Cholmly
at Sir Stephen Fox’s, and there was also the Cofferer, and we did there
consider about our money and the condition of the Excise, and after much
dispute agreed upon a state thereof and the manner of our future course
of payments. Thence to the Duke of York, and there did a little navy
business as we used to do, and so to a Committee for Tangier, where God
knows how my Lord Bellasses’s accounts passed; understood by nobody but
my Lord Ashly, who, I believe, was mad to let them go as he pleased. But
here Sir H. Cholmly had his propositions read, about a greater price for
his work of the Mole, or to do it upon account, which, being read, he
was bid to withdraw. But, Lord! to see how unlucky a man may be, by
chance; for, making an unfortunate minute when they were almost tired
with the other business, the Duke of York did find fault with it, and
that made all the rest, that I believe he had better have given a great
deal, and had nothing said to it to-day; whereas, I have seen other
things more extravagant passed at first hearing, without any difficulty.
Thence I to my Lord Brouncker’s, at Mrs. Williams’s, and there dined,
and she did shew me her closet, which I was sorry to see, for fear of
her expecting something from me; and here she took notice of my wife’s
not once coming to see her, which I am glad of; for she shall not--a
prating, vain, idle woman. Thence with Lord Brouncker to Loriners’-hall,

     [The Loriners, or Lorimers (bit-makers), of London are by reputation
     an ancient mistery, but they were first incorporated by letters
     patent of 10 Queen Anne (December 3rd, 1711).  Their small hall was
     at the corner of Basinghall Street in London Wall.  The company has
     no hall now.]

by Mooregate, a hall I never heard of before, to Sir Thomas Teddiman’s
burial, where most people belonging to the sea were. And here we had
rings: and here I do hear that some of the last words that he said were,
that he had a very good King, God bless him! but that the Parliament had
very ill rewarded him for all the service he had endeavoured to do
them and his country; so that, for certain, this did go far towards his
death. But, Lord! to see among [the company] the young commanders, and
Thomas Killigrew and others that come, how unlike a burial this was,
O’Brian taking out some ballads out of his pocket, which I read, and the
rest come about me to hear! and there very merry we were all, they being
new ballets. By and by the corpse went; and I, with my Lord Brouncker,
and Dr. Clerke, and Mr. Pierce, as far as the foot of London-bridge;
and there we struck off into Thames Street, the rest going to Redriffe,
where he is to be buried. And we ‘light at the Temple, and there
parted; and I to the King’s house, and there saw the last act of “The
Committee,” thinking to have seen Knepp there, but she did not act. And
so to my bookseller’s, and there carried home some books-among others,
“Dr. Wilkins’s Reall Character,” and thence to Mrs. Turner’s, and there
went and sat, and she showed me her house from top to bottom, which I
had not seen before, very handsome, and here supped, and so home, and
got Mercer, and she and I in the garden singing till ten at night, and
so home to a little supper, and then parted, with great content, and
to bed. The Duchesse of Monmouth’s hip is, I hear, now set again, after
much pain. I am told also that the Countess of Shrewsbury is brought
home by the Duke of Buckingham to his house, where his Duchess saying
that it was not for her and the other to live together in a house, he
answered, Why, Madam, I did think so, and, therefore, have ordered your
coach to be ready, to carry you to your father’s, which was a devilish
speech, but, they say, true; and my Lady Shrewsbury is there, it seems.