10th (Lord’s day). Up, and to the office, there to do, business till
church time, when Mr. Shepley, newly come to town, come to see me,
and we had some discourse of all matters, and particularly of my Lord
Sandwich’s concernments, and here did by the by as he would seem tell
me that my Lady--[Lady Sandwich.]--had it in her thoughts, if she had
occasion, to, borrow L100 of me, which I did not declare any opposition
to, though I doubt it will be so much lost. But, however, I will not
deny my Lady, if she ask it, whatever comes of it, though it be lost;
but shall be glad that it is no bigger sum. And yet it vexes me though,
and the more because it brings into my head some apprehensions what
trouble I may here after be brought to when my Lord comes home, if
he should ask me to come into bonds with him, as I fear he will have
occasions to make money, but I hope I shall have the wit to deny it.
He being gone, I to church, and so home, and there comes W. Hewer and
Balty, and by and by I sent for Mercer to come and dine with me, and
pretty merry, and after dinner I fell to teach her “Canite Jehovae,”
 which she did a great part presently, and so she away, and I to church,
and from church home with my Lady Pen; and, after being there an hour
or so talking, I took her, and Mrs. Lowther, and old Mrs. Whistler, her
mother-in-law, by water with great pleasure as far as Chelsy, and so
back to Spring Garden, at Fox-hall, and there walked, and eat, and
drank, and so to water again, and set down the old woman at home at
Durham Yard:’ and it raining all the way, it troubled us; but, however,
my cloak kept us all dry, and so home, and at the Tower wharf there we
did send for a pair of old shoes for Mrs. Lowther, and there I did pull
the others off and put them on, elle being peu shy, but do speak con
mighty kindness to me that she would desire me pour su mari if it were
to be done..... Here staid a little at Sir W. Pen’s, who was gone to
bed, it being about eleven at night, and so I home to bed.