8th. Up, and at my office all the morning, doing business, and then at
noon home to dinner all alone. Then to White Hall with Sir J. Minnes in
his coach to attend the Duke of York upon our usual business, which
was this day but little, and thence with Lord Brouncker to the Duke
of York’s playhouse, where we saw “The Unfortunate Lovers,” no
extraordinary play, methinks, and thence I to Drumbleby’s, and there did
talk a great deal about pipes; and did buy a recorder, which I do intend
to learn to play on, the sound of it being, of all sounds in the world,
most pleasing to me. Thence home, and to visit Mrs. Turner, where among
other talk, Mr. Foly and her husband being there, she did tell me
of young Captain Holmes’s marrying of Pegg Lowther last Saturday by
stealth, which I was sorry for, he being an idle rascal, and proud, and
worth little, I doubt; and she a mighty pretty, well-disposed lady, and
good fortune. Her mother and friends take on mightily; but the sport
is, Sir Robert Holmes do seem to be mad too with his brother, and will
disinherit him, saying that he hath ruined himself, marrying below
himself, and to his disadvantage; whereas, I said, in this company, that
I had married a sister lately, with little above half that portion, that
he should have kissed her breech before he should have had her, which,
if R. Holmes should hear, would make a great quarrel; but it is true I
am heartily sorry for the poor girl that is undone by it. So home to
my chamber, to be fingering of my Recorder, and getting of the scale of
musique without book, which I at last see is necessary for a man that
would understand musique, as it is now taught to understand, though
it be a ridiculous and troublesome way, and I know I shall be able
hereafter to show the world a simpler way; but, like the old hypotheses
in philosophy, it must be learned, though a man knows a better. Then
to supper, and to bed. This morning Mr. Christopher Pett’s widow and
daughter come to me, to desire my help to the King and Duke of York, and
I did promise, and do pity her.