4th. Up, and with W. Hewer by water to White Hall, and there did wait as
usual upon the Duke of York, where, upon discoursing something touching
the Ticket-Office, which by letter the Board did give the Duke of York
their advice, to be put upon Lord Brouncker, Sir J. Minnes did foolishly
rise up and complain of the Office, and his being made nothing of; and
this before Sir Thomas Littleton, who would be glad of this difference
among us, which did trouble me mightily; and therefore I did forbear
to say what I otherwise would have thought fit for me to say on this
occasion, upon so impertinent a speech as this doting fool made--but, I
say, I let it alone, and contented myself that it went as I advised,
as to the Duke of York’s judgment, in the thing disputed. And so thence
away, my coach meeting me there and carrying me to several places to
do little jobs, which is a mighty convenience, and so home, where by
invitation I find my aunt Wight, who looked over all our house, and is
mighty pleased with it, and indeed it is now mighty handsome, and rich
in furniture. By and by comes my uncle, and then to dinner, where a
venison pasty and very merry, and after dinner I carried my wife and
her to Smithfield, where they sit in the coach, while Mr. Pickering, who
meets me there, and I, and W. Hewer, and a friend of his, a jockey, did
go about to see several pairs of horses, for my coach; but it was late,
and we agreed on none, but left it to another time: but here I do see
instances of a piece of craft and cunning that I never dreamed of,
concerning the buying and choosing of horses. So Mr. Pickering, to whom
I am much beholden for his kindness herein, and I parted; and I with my
people home, where I left them, and I to the office, to meet about some
business of Sir W. Warren’s accounts, where I vexed to see how ill all
the Comptroller’s business is likely to go on, so long as ever Sir J.
Minnes lives; and so troubled I was, that I thought it a good occasion
for me to give my thoughts of it in writing, and therefore wrote a
letter at the Board, by the help of a tube, to Lord Brouncker, and
did give it him, which I kept a copy of, and it may be of use to me
hereafter to shew, in this matter. This being done, I home to my aunt,
who supped with us, and my uncle also: and a good-humoured woman she is,
so that I think we shall keep her acquaintance; but mighty proud she is
of her wedding-ring, being lately set with diamonds; cost her about L12:
and I did commend it mightily to her, but do not think it very suitable
for one of our quality. After supper they home, and we to bed.