13th. Up, and with Sir W. Pen by coach to White Hall, where to the
Duke of York, and there did our usual business; and thence I to the
Commissioners of the Treasury, where I staid, and heard an excellent
case argued between my Lord Gerard and the Town of Newcastle, about a
piece of ground which that Lord hath got a grant of, under the Exchequer
Seal, which they were endeavouring to get of the King under the
Great Seal. I liked mightily the Counsel for the town, Shaftow, their
Recorder, and Mr. Offly. But I was troubled, and so were the Lords,
to hear my Lord fly out against their great pretence of merit from the
King, for their sufferings and loyalty; telling them that they might
thank him for that repute which they have for their loyalty, for that
it was he that forced them to be so, against their wills, when he was
there: and, moreover, did offer a paper to the Lords to read from the
Town, sent in 1648; but the Lords would not read it; but I believe it
was something about bringing the King to trial, or some such thing,
in that year. Thence I to the Three Tuns Tavern, by Charing Cross, and
there dined with W. Pen, Sir J. Minnes, and Commissioner Middleton; and
as merry as my mind could be, that hath so much trouble upon it at home.
And thence to White Hall, and there staid in Mr. Wren’s chamber with
him, reading over my draught of a letter, which Mr. Gibson then attended
me with; and there he did like all, but doubted whether it would be
necessary for the Duke to write in so sharp a style to the Office, as I
had drawn it in; which I yield to him, to consider the present posture
of the times and the Duke of York and whether it were not better to err
on that hand than the other. He told me that he did not think it was
necessary for the Duke of York to do so, and that it would not suit so
well with his nature nor greatness; which last, perhaps, is true, but
then do too truly shew the effects of having Princes in places, where
order and discipline should be. I left it to him to do as the Duke of
York pleases; and so fell to other talk, and with great freedom,
of public things; and he told me, upon my several inquiries to that
purpose, that he did believe it was not yet resolved whether the
Parliament should ever meet more or no, the three great rulers of things
now standing thus:--The Duke of Buckingham is absolutely against their
meeting, as moved thereto by his people that he advises with, the people
of the late times, who do never expect to have any thing done by this
Parliament for their religion, and who do propose that, by the sale of
the Church-lands, they shall be able to put the King out of debt: my
Lord Keeper is utterly against putting away this and choosing another
Parliament, lest they prove worse than this, and will make all the
King’s friends, and the King himself, in a desperate condition: my Lord
Arlington know not which is best for him, being to seek whether this
or the next will use him worst. He tells me that he believes that it is
intended to call this Parliament, and try them with a sum of money; and,
if they do not like it, then to send them going, and call another, who
will, at the ruin of the Church perhaps, please the King with what he
will for a time. And he tells me, therefore, that he do believe that
this policy will be endeavoured by the Church and their friends--to seem
to promise the King money, when it shall be propounded, but make the
King and these great men buy it dear, before they have it. He tells me
that he is really persuaded that the design of the Duke of Buckingham
is, by bringing the state into such a condition as, if the King do die
without issue, it shall, upon his death, break into pieces again; and
so put by the Duke of York, who they have disobliged, they know, to that
degree, as to despair of his pardon. He tells me that there is no way to
rule the King but by brisknesse, which the Duke of Buckingham hath above
all men; and that the Duke of York having it not, his best way is what
he practices, that is to say, a good temper, which will support him till
the Duke of Buckingham and Lord Arlington fall out, which cannot be
long first, the former knowing that the latter did, in the time of the
Chancellor, endeavour with the Chancellor to hang him at that time, when
he was proclaimed against. And here, by the by, he told me that the Duke
of Buckingham did, by his friends, treat with my Lord Chancellor, by
the mediation of Matt. Wren and Matt. Clifford, to fall in with my Lord
Chancellor; which, he tells me, he did advise my Lord Chancellor to
accept of, as that, that with his own interest and the Duke of York’s,
would undoubtedly have assured all to him and his family; but that my
Lord Chancellor was a man not to be advised, thinking himself too high
to be counselled: and so all is come to nothing; for by that means the
Duke of Buckingham became desperate, and was forced to fall in with
Arlington, to his [the Chancellor’s] ruin. Thence I home, and there to
talk, with great pleasure all the evening, with my wife, who tells me
that Deb, has been abroad to-day, and is come home and says she has got
a place to go to, so as she will be gone tomorrow morning. This troubled
me, and the truth is, I have a good mind to have the maidenhead of this
girl, which I should not doubt to have if je could get time para be con
her. But she will be gone and I not know whither. Before we went to bed
my wife told me she would not have me to see her or give her her wages,
and so I did give my wife L10 for her year and half a quarter’s wages,
which she went into her chamber and paid her, and so to bed, and there,
blessed be God! we did sleep well and with peace, which I had not
done in now almost twenty nights together. This afternoon I went to my
coachmaker and Crow’s, and there saw things go on to my great content.
This morning, at the Treasury-chamber, I did meet Jack Fenn, and there
he did shew me my Lord Anglesey’s petition and the King’s answer: the
former good and stout, as I before did hear it: but the latter short and
weak, saying that he was not, by what the King had done, hindered from
taking the benefit of his laws, and that the reason he had to suspect
his mismanagement of his money in Ireland, did make him think it unfit
to trust him with his Treasury in England, till he was satisfied in the
former.