2nd. Up, after much pleasant talk with my wife, and upon some
alterations I will make in my house in her absence, and I do intend to
lay out some money thereon. So she and I up, and she got her ready to be
gone, and by and by comes Betty Turner and her mother, and W. Batelier,
and they and Deb., to whom I did give 10s. this morning, to oblige her
to please her mistress (and ego did baiser her mouche), and also Jane,
and so in two coaches set out about eight o’clock towards the carrier,
there for to take coach for my father’s, that is to say, my wife and
Betty Turner, Deb., and Jane; but I meeting my Lord Anglesey going to
the Office, was forced to ‘light in Cheapside, and there took my leave
of them (not baisado Deb., which je had a great mind to), left them to
go to their coach, and I to the office, where all the morning busy, and
so at noon with my other clerks (W. Hewer being a day’s journey with my
wife) to dinner, where Mr. Pierce come and dined with me, and then with
Lord Brouncker (carrying his little kinswoman on my knee, his coach
being full), to the Temple, where my Lord and I ‘light and to Mr.
Porter’s chamber, where Cocke and his counsel, and so to the attorney’s,
whither the Sollicitor-Generall come, and there, their cause about their
assignments on the L1,250,000 Act was argued, where all that was to
be said for them was said, and so answered by the Sollicitor-Generall
beyond what I expected, that I said not one word all my time, rather
choosing to hold my tongue, and so mind my reputation with the
Sollicitor-Generall, who did mightily approve of my speech in
Parliament, than say anything against him to no purpose. This I believe
did trouble Cocke and these gentlemen, but I do think this best for me,
and so I do think that the business will go against them, though it is
against my judgment, and I am sure against all justice to the men to
be invited to part with their goods and be deceived afterward of their
security for payment. Thence with Lord Brouncker to the Royall Society,
where they were just done; but there I was forced to subscribe to
the building of a College, and did give L40; and several others did
subscribe, some greater and some less sums; but several I saw hang
off: and I doubt it will spoil the Society, for it breeds faction and
ill-will, and becomes burdensome to some that cannot, or would not,
do it. Here, to my great content, I did try the use of the
Otacousticon,--[Ear trumpet.]--which was only a great glass bottle broke
at the bottom, putting the neck to my eare, and there I did plainly hear
the dashing of the oares of the boats in the Thames to Arundell gallery
window, which, without it, I could not in the least do, and may, I
believe, be improved to a great height, which I am mighty glad of.
Thence with Lord Brouncker and several of them to the King’s Head
Taverne by Chancery Lane, and there did drink and eat and talk, and,
above the rest, I did hear of Mr. Hooke and my Lord an account of the
reason of concords and discords in musique, which they say is from the
equality of vibrations; but I am not satisfied in it, but will at my
leisure think of it more, and see how far that do go to explain it. So
late at night home with Mr. Colwell, and parted, and I to the office,
and then to Sir W. Pen to confer with him, and Sir R. Ford and Young,
about our St. John Baptist prize, and so home, without more supper to
bed, my family being now little by the departure of my wife and two
maids.