18th. Lay long in bed talking with my wife, she being unwilling to have
me go abroad, saying and declaring herself jealous of my going out for
fear of my going to Deb., which I do deny, for which God forgive me,
for I was no sooner out about noon but I did go by coach directly to
Somerset House, and there enquired among the porters there for Dr.
Allbun, and the first I spoke with told me he knew him, and that he was
newly gone into Lincoln’s Inn Fields, but whither he could not tell me,
but that one of his fellows not then in the way did carry a chest of
drawers thither with him, and that when he comes he would ask him. This
put me into some hopes, and I to White Hall, and thence to Mr. Povy’s,
but he at dinner, and therefore I away and walked up and down the Strand
between the two turnstiles, hoping to see her out of a window, and then
employed a porter, one Osberton, to find out this Doctor’s lodgings
thereabouts, who by appointment comes to me to Hercules pillars, where
I dined alone, but tells me that he cannot find out any such, but will
enquire further. Thence back to White Hall to the Treasury a while, and
thence to the Strand, and towards night did meet with the porter that
carried the chest of drawers with this Doctor, but he would not tell me
where he lived, being his good master, he told me, but if I would have
a message to him he would deliver it. At last I told him my business was
not with him, but a little gentlewoman, one Mrs. Willet, that is with
him, and sent him to see how she did from her friend in London, and no
other token. He goes while I walk in Somerset House, walk there in the
Court; at last he comes back and tells me she is well, and that I
may see her if I will, but no more. So I could not be commanded by my
reason, but I must go this very night, and so by coach, it being now
dark, I to her, close by my tailor’s, and she come into the coach to me,
and je did baiser her.... I did nevertheless give her the best council I
could, to have a care of her honour, and to fear God, and suffer no man
para avoir to do con her as je have done, which she promised. Je did
give her 20s. and directions para laisser sealed in paper at any time
the name of the place of her being at Herringman’s, my bookseller in the
‘Change, by which I might go para her, and so bid her good night with
much content to my mind, and resolution to look after her no more till
I heard from her. And so home, and there told my wife a fair tale,
God knows, how I spent the whole day, with which the poor wretch was
satisfied, or at least seemed so, and so to supper and to bed, she
having been mighty busy all day in getting of her house in order against
to-morrow to hang up our new hangings and furnishing our best chamber.