27th (Lord’s day). Walked to White Hall and there saw the King at
chapel; but staid not to hear anything, but went to walk in the Park,
with W. Hewer, who was with me; and there, among others, met with Sir G.
Downing, and walked with him an hour, talking of business, and how the
late war was managed, there being nobody to take care of it, and telling
how, when he was in Holland, what he offered the King to do, if he might
have power, and they would give him power, and then, upon the least
word, perhaps of a woman, to the King, he was contradicted again, and
particularly to the loss of all that we lost in Guinny. He told me that
he had so good spies, that he hath had the keys taken out of De Witt’s

     [The celebrated John de Witt, Grand Pensionary of Holland, who,
     a few years afterwards, was massacred, with his brother Cornelius,
     by the Dutch mob, enraged at their opposition to the elevation of
     William of Orange to the Stadtholdership, when the States were
     overrun by the French army, and the Dutch fleets beaten at sea by
     the English.  The murder of the De Witts forms one of the main
     incidents of Alexandre Dumas’s “Black Tulip.”]

pocket when he was a-bed, and his closet opened, and papers brought to
him, and left in his hands for an hour, and carried back and laid in the
place again, and keys put into his pocket again. He says that he hath
always had their most private debates, that have been but between two or
three of the chief of them, brought to him in an hour after, and an hour
after that, hath sent word thereof to the King, but nobody here regarded
them. But he tells me the sad news, that he is out of all expectations
that ever the debts of the Navy will be paid, if the Parliament do not
enable the King to do it by money; all they can hope for to do out
of the King’s revenue being but to keep our wheels a-going on present
services, and, if they can, to cut off the growing interest: which is a
sad story, and grieves me to the heart. So home, my coach coming for me,
and there find Balty and Mr. How, who dined with me; and there my wife
and I fell out a little about the foulness of the linen of the table,
but were friends presently, but she cried, poor heart! which I was
troubled for, though I did not give her one hard word. Dinner done, she
to church, and W. How and I all the afternoon talking together about my
Lord Sandwich’s suffering his business of the prizes to be managed by
Sir R. Cuttance, who is so deep in the business, more than my Lord knows
of, and such a loggerhead, and under such prejudice, that he will, we
doubt, do my Lord much wrong. In the evening, he gone, my wife to read
to me and talk, and spent the evening with much pleasure, and so to
supper and to bed.