24th. Up pretty betimes, and so there comes to me Mr. Shish, to desire
my appearing for him to succeed Mr. Christopher Pett, lately dead, in
his place of Master-Shipwright of Deptford and Woolwich, which I do
resolve to promote what I can. So by and by to White Hall, and there to
the Duke of York’s chamber, where I understand it is already resolved
by the King and Duke of York that Shish shall have the place. From the
Duke’s chamber Sir W. Coventry and I to walk in the Matted Gallery; and
there, among other things, he tells me of the wicked design that now is
at last contriving against him, to get a petition presented from people
that the money they have paid to W. Coventry for their places may be
repaid them back; and that this is set on by Temple and Hollis of the
Parliament, and, among other mean people in it, by Captain Tatnell: and
he prays me that I will use some effectual way to sift Tatnell what he
do, and who puts him on in this business, which I do undertake, and will
do with all my skill for his service, being troubled that he is still
under this difficulty. Thence up and down Westminster by Mrs. Burroughes
her mother’s shop, thinking to have seen her, but could not, and
therefore back to White Hall, where great talk of the tumult at the
other end of the town, about Moore-fields, among the ‘prentices, taking
the liberty of these holydays to pull down bawdy-houses.

     [It was customary for the apprentices of the metropolis to avail
     themselves of their holidays, especially on Shrove Tuesday, to
     search after women of ill fame, and to confine them during the
     season of Lent.  See a “Satyre against Separatists,” 1642.

          “Stand forth, Shrove Tuesday, one a’ the silenc’st bricklayers;
          ‘Tis in your charge to pull down bawdy-houses.”

                    Middleton’s Inner Temple Masque, 1619,
                         Works, ed.  Bullen, vii., 209.]

And, Lord! to see the apprehensions which this did give to all people
at Court, that presently order was given for all the soldiers, horse
and foot, to be in armes! and forthwith alarmes were beat by drum and
trumpet through Westminster, and all to their colours, and to horse, as
if the French were coming into the town! So Creed, whom I met here, and
I to Lincolne’s Inn-fields, thinking to have gone into the fields
to have seen the ‘prentices; but here we found these fields full of
soldiers all in a body, and my Lord Craven commanding of them, and
riding up and down to give orders, like a madman. And some young men we
saw brought by soldiers to the Guard at White Hall, and overheard others
that stood by say, that it was only for pulling down the bawdy-houses;
and none of the bystanders finding fault with them, but rather of the
soldiers for hindering them. And we heard a justice of the Peace this
morning say to the King, that he had been endeavouring to suppress this
tumult, but could not; and that, imprisoning some [of them] in the new
prison at Clerkenwell, the rest did come and break open the prison and
release them; and that they do give out that they are for pulling down
the bawdy-houses, which is one of the greatest grievances of the nation.
To which the King made a very poor, cold, insipid answer: “Why, why do
they go to them, then?” and that was all, and had no mind to go on with
the discourse. Mr. Creed and I to dinner to my Lord Crew, where little
discourse, there being none but us at the table, and my Lord and my Lady
Jemimah, and so after dinner away, Creed and I to White Hall, expecting
a Committee of Tangier, but come too late. So I to attend the Council,
and by and by were called in with Lord Brouncker and Sir W. Pen to
advise how to pay away a little money to most advantage to the men of
the yards, to make them dispatch the ships going out, and there did make
a little speech, which was well liked, and after all it was found most
satisfactory to the men, and best for the king’s dispatch, that what
money we had should be paid weekly to the men for their week’s work
until a greater sum could be got to pay them their arrears and then
discharge them. But, Lord! to see what shifts and what cares and
thoughts there was employed in this matter how to do the King’s work and
please the men and stop clamours would make a man think the King should
not eat a bit of good meat till he has got money to pay the men, but I
do not see the least print of care or thoughts in him about it at all.
Having done here, I out and there met Sir Fr. Hollis, who do still tell
me that, above all things in the world, he wishes he had my tongue in
his mouth, meaning since my speech in Parliament. He took Lord Brouncker
and me down to the guards, he and his company being upon the guards
to-day; and there he did, in a handsome room to that purpose, make us
drink, and did call for his bagpipes, which, with pipes of ebony, tipt
with silver, he did play beyond anything of that kind that ever I heard
in my life; and with great pains he must have obtained it, but with
pains that the instrument do not deserve at all; for, at the best, it is
mighty barbarous musick. So home and there to my chamber, to prick out
my song, “It is Decreed,” intending to have it ready to give Mr. Harris
on Thursday, when we meet, for him to sing, believing that he will do it
more right than a woman that sings better, unless it were Knepp, which
I cannot have opportunity to teach it to. This evening I come home from
White Hall with Sir W. Pen, who fell in talk about his going to sea this
year, and the difficulties that arise to him by it, by giving offence to
the Prince, and occasioning envy to him, and many other things that make
it a bad matter, at this time of want of money and necessaries, and bad
and uneven counsels at home,--for him to go abroad: and did tell me how
much with the King and Duke of York he had endeavoured to be excused,
desiring the Prince might be satisfied in it, who hath a mind to go;
but he tells me they will not excuse him, and I believe it, and truly do
judge it a piece of bad fortune to W. Pen.