30th. Up betimes; and Mr. Povy comes to even accounts with me, which we
did, and then fell to other talk. He tells, in short, how the King is
made a child of, by Buckingham and Arlington, to the lessening of the
Duke of York, whom they cannot suffer to be great, for fear of my
Lord Chancellor’s return, which, therefore, they make the King violent
against. That he believes it is impossible these two great men can
hold together long: or, at least, that the ambition of the former is so
great, that he will endeavour to master all, and bring into play as
many as he can. That Anglesey will not lose his place easily, but will
contend in law with whoever comes to execute it. That the Duke of York,
in all things but in his cod-piece, is led by the nose by his wife. That
W. Coventry is now, by the Duke of York, made friends with the Duchess;
and that he is often there, and waits on her. That he do believe that
these present great men will break in time, and that W. Coventry will be
a great man again; for he do labour to have nothing to do in matters
of the State, and is so usefull to the side that he is on, that he
will stand, though at present he is quite out of play. That my Lady
Castlemayne hates the Duke of Buckingham. That the Duke of York hath
expressed himself very kind to my Lord Sandwich, which I am mighty glad
of. That we are to expect more changes if these men stand. This done,
he and I to talk of my coach, and I got him to go see it, where he finds
most infinite fault with it, both as to being out of fashion and heavy,
with so good reason that I am mightily glad of his having corrected
me in it; and so I do resolve to have one of his build, and with his
advice, both in coach and horses, he being the fittest man in the world
for it, and so he carried me home, and said the same to my wife. So I
to the office and he away, and at noon I home to dinner, and all
the afternoon late with Gibson at my chamber about my present great
business, only a little in the afternoon at the office about Sir D.
Gawden’s accounts, and so to bed and slept heartily, my wife and I at
good peace, but my heart troubled and her mind not at ease, I perceive,
she against and I for the girle, to whom I have not said anything these
three days, but resolve to be mighty strange in appearance to her. This
night W. Batelier come and took his leave of us, he setting out for
France to-morrow.