7th. Up, and to the office, to the getting of my books in order, to
carry to the Commissioners of Accounts this morning. This being done, I
away first to Westminster Hall, and there met my cozen, Roger Pepys, by
his desire, the first time I have seen him since his coming to town, the
Parliament meeting yesterday and adjourned to Monday next; and here he
tells me that Mr. Jackson, my sister’s servant, is come to town, and
hath this day suffered a recovery on his estate, in order to the making
her a settlement. The young man is gone out of the Hall, so I could not
now see him, but here I walked a good while with my cozen, and among
other things do hear that there is a great triall between my Lord Gerard
and Carr to-day, who is indicted for his life at the King’s Bench, for
running from his colours; but all do say that my Lord Gerard, though he
designs the ruining of this man, will not get any thing by it. Thence
to the Commissioners of Accounts, and there presented my books, and was
made to sit down, and used with much respect, otherwise than the other
day, when I come to them as a criminal about the business of the prizes.
I sat here with them a great while, while my books were inventoried.
And here do hear from them by discourse that they are like to undo the
Treasurer’s instruments of the Navy by making it a rule that they
shall repay all money paid to wrong parties, which is a thing not to be
supported by these poor creatures the Treasurer’s instruments, as it
is also hard for seamen to be ruined by their paying money to whom they
please. I know not what will be the issue of it. I find these gentlemen
to sit all day, and only eat a bit of bread at noon, and a glass of
wine; and are resolved to go through their business with great severity
and method. Thence I, about two o’clock, to Westminster Hall, by
appointment, and there met my cozen Roger again, and Mr. Jackson, who
is a plain young man, handsome enough for Pall, one of no education
nor discourse, but of few words, and one altogether that, I think, will
please me well enough. My cozen had got me to give the odd sixth L100
presently, which I intended to keep to the birth of the first child: and
let it go--I shall be eased of the care, and so, after little talk,
we parted, resolving to dine together at my house tomorrow. So there
parted, my mind pretty well satisfied with this plain fellow for my
sister, though I shall, I see, have no pleasure nor content in him, as
if he had been a man of reading and parts, like Cumberland, and to the
Swan, and there sent for a bit of meat and eat and drank, and so to
White Hall to the Duke of York’s chamber, where I find him and my
fellows at their usual meeting, discoursing about securing the Medway
this year, which is to shut the door after the horse is stole. However,
it is good. Having done here, my Lord Brouncker, and W. Pen, and I, and
with us Sir Arnold Breames, to the King’s playhouse, and there saw a
piece of “Love in a Maze,” a dull, silly play, I think; and after the
play, home with W. Pen and his son Lowther, whom we met there, and then
home and sat most of the evening with my wife and Mr. Pelting, talking,
my head being full of business of one kind or other, and most such as do
not please me, and so to supper and to bed.