11th. Up, and by water to Sir W. Coventry to visit him, whom I find yet
troubled at the Commissioners of Accounts, about this business of Sir
W. Warren, which is a ridiculous thing, and can come to nothing but
contempt, and thence to Westminster Hall, where the Parliament met
enough to adjourne, which they did, to the 10th of November next, and so
by water home to the office, and so to dinner, and thence at the Office
all the afternoon till night, being mightily pleased with a little trial
I have made of the use of a tube-spectacall of paper, tried with my
right eye. This day I hear that, to the great joy of the Nonconformists,
the time is out of the Act against them, so that they may meet: and they
have declared that they will have a morning lecture

     [During the troubled reign of Charles I., the House of Commons gave
     parishioners the right of appointing lecturers at the various
     churches without the consent of rector or vicar, and this naturally
     gave rise to many quarrels.  In the early period of the war between
     the king and the parliament, a course of sermons or lectures was
     projected in aid of the parliamentary cause.  These lectures, which
     were preached by eminent Presbyterian divines at seven o’clock on
     the Sunday mornings, were commenced in the church of St. Mary
     Magdalen in Milk Street, but were soon afterwards removed to St.
     Giles’s, Cripplegate.  After the Restoration the lectures were
     collected in four volumes, and published under the title of the
     “Cripplegate Morning Exercises,” vol. i. in 1661; vol. ii. in 1674;
     vol. iii. in 1682; and vol. iv. in 1690.  In addition there were two
     volumes which form a supplement to the work, viz., “The Morning
     Exercises methodized,” preached at St. Giles’s-in-the-Fields, edited
     by the Rev. Thomas Case in 1660, and the “Exercises against Popery,”
      preached in Southwark, and published in 1675 (see Demon’s “Records
     of St. Giles’s, Crinnlegate,” 1883, pp. 55-56).]

up again, which is pretty strange; and they are connived at by the King
every where, I hear, in City and country. So to visit W. Pen, who is yet
ill, and then home, where W. Batelier and Mrs. Turner come and sat and
supped with us, and so they gone we to bed. This afternoon my wife, and
Mercer, and Deb., went with Pelting to see the gypsies at Lambeth, and
have their fortunes told; but what they did, I did not enquire.