9th. Up, and to the office, and thence to the Duke of Richmond’s
lodgings by his desire, by letter, yesterday. I find him at his lodgings
in the little building in the bowling-green, at White Hall, that was
begun to be built by Captain Rolt. They are fine rooms. I did hope to
see his lady, the beautiful Mrs. Stuart, but she, I hear, is in the
country. His business was about his yacht, and he seems a mighty
good-natured man, and did presently write me a warrant for a doe from
Cobham, when the season comes, bucks season being past. I shall make
much of this acquaintance, that I may live to see his lady near. Thence
to Westminster, to Sir R. Longs Office: and, going, met Mr. George
Montagu, who talked and complimented me mightily; and long discourse I
had with him, who, for news, tells me for certain that Trevor do come to
be Secretary at Michaelmas, and that Morrice goes out, and he believes,
without any compensation. He tells me that now Buckingham does rule all;
and the other day, in the King’s journey he is now on, at Bagshot, and
that way, he caused Prince Rupert’s horses to be turned out of an inne,
and caused his own to be kept there, which the Prince complained of to
the King, and the Duke of York seconded the complaint; but the King did
over-rule it for Buckingham, by which there are high displeasures among
them; and Buckingham and Arlington rule all. Thence by water home and to
dinner, and after dinner by water again to White Hall, where Brouncker,
W. Pen, and I attended the Commissioners of the Treasury about the
victualling-contract, where high words between Sir Thomas Clifford and
us, and myself more particularly, who told him that something, that he
said was told him about this business, was a flat untruth. However,
we went on to our business in, the examination of the draught, and so
parted, and I vexed at what happened, and Brouncker and W. Pen and I
home in a hackney coach. And I all that night so vexed that I did not
sleep almost all night, which shows how unfit I am for trouble. So,
after a little supper, vexed, and spending a little time melancholy in
making a base to the Lark’s song, I to bed.