25th. Up, and by coach with W. Hewer to see W. Coventry; but he gone
out, I to White Hall, and there waited on Lord Sandwich, which I have
little encouragement to do, because of the difficulty of seeing him, and
the little he hath to say to me when I do see him, or to any body else,
but his own idle people about him, Sir Charles Harbord, &c. Thence
walked with him to White Hall, where to the Duke of York; and there the
Duke, and Wren, and I, by appointment in his closet, to read over our
letter to the Office, which he heard, and signed it, and it is to my
mind, Mr. Wren having made it somewhat sweeter to the Board, and yet
with all the advice fully, that I did draw it up with. He [the Duke]
said little more to us now, his head being full of other business; but
I do see that he do continue to put a value upon my advice; and so Mr.
Wren and I to his chamber, and there talked: and he seems to hope that
these people, the Duke of Buckingham and Arlington, will run themselves
off of their legs; they being forced to be always putting the King upon
one idle thing or other, against the easiness of his nature, which he
will never be able to bear, nor they to keep him to, and so will lose
themselves. And, for instance of their little progress, he tells me
that my Lord of Ormond is like yet to carry it, and to continue in his
command in Ireland; at least, they cannot get the better of him yet. But
he tells me that the Keeper is wrought upon, as they say, to give his
opinion for the dissolving of the Parliament, which, he thinks, will
undo him in the eyes of the people. He do not seem to own the hearing
or fearing of any thing to be done in the Admiralty, to the lessening of
the Duke of York, though he hears how the town talk’s full of it. Thence
I by coach home, and there find my cozen Roger come to dine with me, and
to seal his mortgage for the L500 I lend him; but he and I first walked
to the ‘Change, there to look for my uncle Wight, and get him to dinner
with us. So home, buying a barrel of oysters at my old oyster-woman’s,
in Gracious Street, but over the way to where she kept her shop before.
So home, and there merry at dinner; and the money not being ready, I
carried Roger Pepys to Holborn Conduit, and there left him going to
Stradwick’s, whom we avoided to see, because of our long absence, and my
wife and I to the Duke of York’s house, to see “The Duchesse of Malfy,”
 a sorry play, and sat with little pleasure, for fear of my wife’s seeing
me look about, and so I was uneasy all the while, though I desire and
resolve never to give her trouble of that kind more. So home, and there
busy at the Office a while, and then home, where my wife to read to me,
and so to supper, and to bed. This evening, to my great content, I got
Sir Richard Ford to give me leave to set my coach in his yard.