23rd. Up, and plasterers at work and painters about my house.
Commissioner Middleton and I to St. James’s, where with the rest of our
company we attended on our usual business the Duke of York. Thence I
to White Hall, to my Lord Sandwich’s, where I find my Lord within, but
busy, private; and so I staid a little talking with the young gentlemen:
and so away with Mr. Pierce, the surgeon, towards Tyburne, to see the
people executed; but come too late, it being done; two men and a woman
hanged, and so back again and to my coachmaker’s, and there did come a
little nearer agreement for the coach, and so to Duck Lane, and there my
bookseller’s, and saw his moher, but elle is so big-bellied that elle is
not worth seeing. So home, and there all alone to dinner, my wife and W.
Hewer being gone to Deptford to see her mother, and so I to the office
all the afternoon. In the afternoon comes my cozen, Sidney Pickering,
to bring my wife and me his sister’s Favour for her wedding, which is
kindly done, and he gone, I to business again, and in the evening home,
made my wife read till supper time, and so to bed. This day Pierce
do tell me, among other news, the late frolick and debauchery of Sir
Charles Sidly and Buckhurst, running up and down all the night with
their arses bare, through the streets; and at last fighting, and being
beat by the watch and clapped up all night; and how the King takes their
parts; and my Lord Chief Justice Keeling hath laid the constable by the
heels to answer it next Sessions: which is a horrid shame. How the
King and these gentlemen did make the fiddlers of Thetford, this last
progress, to sing them all the bawdy songs they could think of. How Sir
W. Coventry was brought the other day to the Duchesse of York by the
Duke, to kiss her hand; who did acknowledge his unhappiness to occasion
her so much sorrow, declaring his intentions in it, and praying her
pardon; which she did give him upon his promise to make good his
pretences of innocence to her family, by his faithfulness to his master,
the Duke of York. That the Duke of Buckingham is now all in all, and
will ruin Coventry, if he can: and that W. Coventry do now rest wholly
upon the Duke of York for his standing, which is a great turn. He tells
me that my Lady Castlemayne, however, is a mortal enemy to the Duke of
Buckingham, which I understand not; but, it seems, she is disgusted
with his greatness, and his ill usage of her. That the King was drunk at
Saxam with Sidly, Buckhurst, &c., the night that my Lord Arlington come
thither, and would not give him audience, or could not which is true,
for it was the night that I was there, and saw the King go up to his
chamber, and was told that the King had been drinking. He tells me,
too, that the Duke of York did the next day chide Bab. May for his
occasioning the King’s giving himself up to these gentlemen, to the
neglecting of my Lord Arlington: to which he answered merrily, that, by
God, there was no man in England that had heads to lose, durst do what
they do, every day, with the King, and asked the Duke of York’s pardon:
which is a sign of a mad world. God bless us out of it!