22nd. Up, and with Balty to St. James’s, and there presented him to Mr.
Wren about his being Muster-Master this year, which will be done. So
up to wait on the Duke of York, and thence, with W. Coventry, walked to
White Hall good discourse about the Navy, where want of money undoes us.
Thence to the Harp and Ball I to drink, and so to the Coffee-house in
Covent Garden; but met with nobody but Sir Philip Howard, who shamed
me before the whole house there, in commendation of my speech in
Parliament, and thence I away home to dinner alone, my wife being at her
tailor’s, and after dinner comes Creed, whom I hate, to speak with me,
and before him comes Mrs. Daniel about business.... She gone, Creed
and I to the King’s playhouse, and saw an act or two of the new
play [“Evening’s Love”] again, but like it not. Calling this day at
Herringman’s, he tells me Dryden do himself call it but a fifth-rate
play. Thence with him to my Lord Brouncker’s, where a Council of the
Royall Society; and there heard Mr. Harry Howard’s’ noble offers about
ground for our College, and his intentions of building his own house
there most nobly. My business was to meet Mr. Boyle, which I did, and
discoursed about my eyes; and he did give me the best advice he could,
but refers me to one Turberville, of Salsbury, lately come to town,
which I will go to.

     [Daubigny Turberville, of Oriel College; created M.D. at
     Oxford,1660.  He was a physician of some eminence, and, dying at
     Salisbury on the 21st April, 1696, aged eighty-five, he was buried
     in the cathedral, where his monument remains.  Cassan, in his “Lives
     of the Bishops of Sarum,” part iii., p. 103, has reprinted an
     interesting account of Turberville, from the “Memoir of Bishop Seth
     Ward,” published in 1697, by Dr. Walter Pope.  Turberville was born
     at Wayford, co. Somerset, in 1612, and became an expert oculist; and
     probably Pepys received great benefit from his advice, as his vision
     does not appear to have failed during the many years that he lived
     after discontinuing the Diary.  The doctor died rich, and
     subsequently to his decease his sister Mary, inheriting all his
     prescriptions, and knowing how to use them, practised as an oculist
     in London with good reputation.--B.]

Thence home, where the streets full, at our end of the town, removing
their wine against the Act begins, which will be two days hence, to
raise the price. I did get my store in of Batelier this night. So home
to supper and to bed.