25th. Up, and walked to White Hall, there to wait on the Duke of York,
which I did: and in his chamber there, first by hearing the Duke of York
call me by my name, my Lord Burlington did come to me, and with great
respect take notice of me and my relation to my Lord Sandwich, and
express great kindness to me; and so to talk of my Lord Sandwich’s
concernments. By and by the Duke of York is ready; and I did wait for
an opportunity of speaking my mind to him about Sir J. Minnes, his being
unable to do the King any service, which I think do become me to do in
all respects, and have Sir W. Coventry’s concurrence therein, which I
therefore will seek a speedy opportunity to do, come what will come of
it. The Duke of York and all with him this morning were full of the talk
of the ‘prentices, who are not yet [put] down, though the guards and
militia of the town have been in armes all this night, and the night
before; and the ‘prentices have made fools of them, sometimes by running
from them and flinging stones at them. Some blood hath been spilt, but
a great many houses pulled down; and, among others, the Duke of York was
mighty merry at that of Damaris Page’s, the great bawd of the seamen;
and the Duke of York complained merrily that he hath lost two tenants,
by their houses being pulled down, who paid him for their wine licenses
L15 a year. But here it was said how these idle fellows have had the
confidence to say that they did ill in contenting themselves in pulling
down the little bawdyhouses, and did not go and pull down the great
bawdy-house at White Hall. And some of them have the last night had a
word among them, and it was “Reformation and Reducement.” This do make
the courtiers ill at ease to see this spirit among people, though they
think this matter will not come to much: but it speaks people’s minds;
and then they do say that there are men of understanding among them,
that have been of Cromwell’s army: but how true that is, I know not.
Thence walked a little to Westminster, but met with nobody to spend any
time with, and so by coach homeward, and in Seething Lane met young
Mrs. Daniel, and I stopt, and she had been at my house, but found nobody
within, and tells me that she drew me for her Valentine this year, so
I took her into the coach, and was going to the other end of the town,
thinking to have taken her abroad, but remembering that I was to go out
with my wife this afternoon,... and so to a milliner at the corner shop
going into Bishopsgate and Leadenhall Street, and there did give her
eight pair of gloves, and so dismissed her, and so I home and to dinner,
and then with my wife to the King’s playhouse to see “The Storme,” which
we did, but without much pleasure, it being but a mean play compared
with “The Tempest,” at the Duke of York’s house, though Knepp did act
her part of grief very well. Thence with my wife and Deb. by coach to
Islington, to the old house, and there eat and drank till it was almost
night, and then home, being in fear of meeting the ‘prentices, who are
many of them yet, they say, abroad in the fields, but we got well home,
and so I to my chamber a while, and then to supper and to bed.