27th. Knepp home with us, and I to bed, and rose about six, mightily
pleased with last night’s mirth, and away by water to St. James’s, and
there, with Mr. Wren, did correct his copy of my letter, which the Duke
of York hath signed in my very words, without alteration of a syllable.

     [A copy of this letter is in the British Museum, Harl.  MS. 6003.
     See July 24th, ante, and August 29th, Post.  In the Pepysian
     Collection are the following: An Inquisition, by his Royal Highness
     the Duke of York, when Lord High Admiral of England, into the
     Management of the Navy, 1668, with his Regulations thereon, fol.
     Also Mr. Pepys’s Defence of the same upon an Inquisition thereunto
     by Parliament, 1669, fol.--B.]

And so pleased therewith, I to my Lord Brouncker, who I find within, but
hath business, and so comes not to the Office to-day. And so I by water
to the Office, where we sat all the morning; and, just as the Board
rises, comes the Duke of York’s letter, which I knowing, and the Board
not being full, and desiring rather to have the Duke of York deliver
it himself to us, I suppressed it for this day, my heart beginning to
falsify in this business, as being doubtful of the trouble it may give
me by provoking them; but, however, I am resolved to go through it, and
it is too late to help it now. At noon to dinner to Captain Cocke’s,
where I met with Mr. Wren; my going being to tell him what I have done,
which he likes, and to confer with Cocke about our Office; who tells me
that he is confident the design of removing our Officers do hold, but
that he is sure that I am safe enough. Which pleases me, though I do not
much shew it to him, but as a thing indifferent. So away home, and there
met at Sir Richard Ford’s with the Duke of York’s Commissioners about
our Prizes, with whom we shall have some trouble before we make an end
with them, and hence, staying a little with them, I with my wife, and W.
Batelier, and Deb.; carried them to Bartholomew Fayre, where we saw the
dancing of the ropes and nothing else, it being late, and so back home
to supper and to bed, after having done at my office.