12th. Up, and to the office, where we sat, and sat all the morning. Here
Lord Anglesey was with us, and in talk about the late difference between
the two Houses, do tell us that he thinks the House of Lords may be in
an error, at least, it is possible they may, in this matter of Skinner;
and he doubts they may, and did declare his judgement in the House
of Lords against their proceedings therein, he having hindered 100
originall causes being brought into their House, notwithstanding that he
was put upon defending their proceedings: but that he is confident that
the House of Commons are in the wrong, in the method they take to remedy
an error of the Lords, for no vote of theirs can do it; but, in all like
cases, the Commons have done it by petition to the King, sent up to
the Lords, and by them agreed to, and so redressed, as they did in the
Petition of Right. He says that he did tell them indeed, which is talked
of, and which did vex the Commons, that the Lords were “Judices nati et
Conciliarii nati;” but all other judges among us are under salary, and
the Commons themselves served for wages; and therefore the Lords, in
reason, were the freer judges. At noon to dinner at home, and after
dinner, where Creed dined with me, he and I, by water to the Temple,
where we parted, and I both to the King’s and Duke of York’s playhouses,
and there went through the houses to see what faces I could spy that I
knew, and meeting none, I away by coach to my house, and then to Mrs.
Mercer’s, where I met with her two daughters, and a pretty-lady I never
knew yet, one Mrs. Susan Gayet, a very pretty black lady, that speaks
French well, and is a Catholick, and merchant’s daughter, by us, and
here was also Mrs. Anne Jones, and after sitting and talking a little, I
took them out, and carried them through Hackney to Kingsland, and there
walked to Sir G. Whitmore’s house, where I have not been many a day;
and so to the old house at Islington, and eat, and drank, and sang, and
mighty merry; and so by moonshine with infinite pleasure home, and there
sang again in Mercer’s garden. And so parted, I having there seen a
mummy in a merchant’s warehouse there, all the middle of the man or
woman’s body, black and hard. I never saw any before, and, therefore, it
pleased me much, though an ill sight; and he did give me a little bit,
and a bone of an arme, I suppose, and so home, and there to bed.