20th (Lord’s day). Up, and with my wife to church, and then home, and
there found W. Joyce come to dine with me, as troublesome a talking
coxcombe as ever he was, and yet once in a year I like him well enough.
In the afternoon my wife and W. Hewer and I to White Hall, where they
set me down and staid till I had been with the Duke of York, with the
rest of us of the Office, and did a little business, and then the Duke
of York in good humour did fall to tell us many fine stories of the wars
in Flanders, and how the Spaniards are the [best] disciplined foot in
the world; will refuse no extraordinary service if commanded, but scorn
to be paid for it, as in other countries, though at the same time they
will beg in the streets: not a soldier will carry you a cloak-bag for
money for the world, though he will beg a penny, and will do the thing,
if commanded by his Commander. That, in the citadel of Antwerp, a
soldier hath not a liberty of begging till he hath served three years.
They will cry out against their King and Commanders and Generals, none
like them in the world, and yet will not hear a stranger say a word
of them but he will cut his throat. That, upon a time, some of the
Commanders of their army exclaiming against their Generals, and
particularly the Marquis de Caranen, the Confessor of the Marquis coming
by and hearing them, he stops and gravely tells them that the three
great trades of the world are, the lawyers, who govern the world; the
churchmen, who enjoy the world; and a sort of fools whom they call
souldiers, who make it their work to defend the world. He told us, too,
that Turenne being now become a Catholique, he is likely to get over the
head of Colbert, their interests being contrary; the latter to promote
trade

     [This reminds us of the famous reply, ‘Laissez nous affaire’, made
     to Colbert by the French merchants, whose interests he thought to
     promote by laws and regulations.--B.]

and the sea, which, says the Duke of York, is that that we have most
cause to fear; and Turenne to employ the King and his forces by land, to
encrease his conquests. Thence to the coach to my wife, and so home,
and there with W. Hewer to my office and to do some business, and so set
down my Journall for four or five days, and then home to supper and read
a little, and to bed. W. Hewer tells me to-day that he hears that the
King of France hath declared in print, that he do intend this next
summer to forbid his Commanders to strike--[Strike topsails]--to us, but
that both we and the Dutch shall strike to him; and that he hath made
his captains swear it already, that they will observe it: which is a
great thing if he do it, as I know nothing to hinder him.