7th. Up, and at the office all the morning, where great hurry to be made
in the fitting forth of this present little fleet, but so many rubs by
reason of want of money, and people’s not believing us in cases where
we had money unless (which in several cases, as in hiring of vessels,
cannot be) they be paid beforehand, that every thing goes backward
instead of forward. At noon comes Mr. Clerke, my solicitor, and the
Auditor’s men with my account drawn up in the Exchequer way with their
queries, which are neither many nor great, or hard to answer upon it,
and so dined with me, and then I by coach to the King’s playhouse, and
there saw “The English Monsieur;”’ sitting for privacy sake in an upper
box: the play hath much mirth in it as to that particular humour. After
the play done, I down to Knipp, and did stay her undressing herself; and
there saw the several players, men and women go by; and pretty to see
how strange they are all, one to another, after the play is done. Here
I saw a wonderful pretty maid of her own, that come to undress her, and
one so pretty that she says she intends not to keep her, for fear of her
being undone in her service, by coming to the playhouse. Here I hear
Sir W. Davenant is just now dead; and so who will succeed him in the
mastership of the house is not yet known. The eldest Davenport is, it
seems, gone from this house to be kept by somebody; which I am glad of,
she being a very bad actor. I took her then up into a coach and away to
the Park, which is now very fine after some rain, but the company was
going away most, and so I took her to the Lodge, and there treated her
and had a deal of good talk, and now and then did baiser la, and that
was all, and that as much or more than I had much mind to because of her
paint. She tells me mighty news, that my Lady Castlemayne is mightily in
love with Hart of their house: and he is much with her in private, and
she goes to him, and do give him many presents; and that the thing is
most certain, and Becke Marshall only privy to it, and the means of
bringing them together, which is a very odd thing; and by this means she
is even with the King’s love to Mrs. Davis. This done, I carried her and
set her down at Mrs. Manuel’s, but stayed not there myself, nor went in;
but straight home, and there to my letters, and so home to bed.