29th (Lord’s day). Lay long in bed with pleasure with my wife, with whom
I have now a great deal of content, and my mind is in other things also
mightily more at ease, and I do mind my business better than ever and am
more at peace, and trust in God I shall ever be so, though I cannot yet
get my mind off from thinking now and then of Deb., but I do ever since
my promise a while since to my wife pray to God by myself in my chamber
every night, and will endeavour to get my wife to do the like with me
ere long, but am in much fear of what she lately frighted me with about
her being a Catholique; and I dare not, therefore, move her to go
to church, for fear she should deny me; but this morning, of her own
accord, she spoke of going to church the next Sunday, which pleases me
mightily. This morning my coachman’s clothes come home; and I like the
livery mightily, and so I all the morning at my chamber, and dined with
my wife, and got her to read to me in the afternoon, till Sir W. Warren,
by appointment, comes to me, who spent two hours, or three, with me,
about his accounts of Gottenburgh, which are so confounded, that I doubt
they will hardly ever pass without my doing something, which he desires
of me, and which, partly from fear, and partly from unwillingness to
wrong the King, and partly from its being of no profit to me, I am
backward to give way to, though the poor man do indeed deserve to be rid
of this trouble, that he hath lain so long under, from the negligence of
this Board. We afterwards fell to other talk, and he tells me, as
soon as he saw my coach yesterday, he wished that the owner might not
contract envy by it; but I told him it was now manifestly for my profit
to keep a coach, and that, after employments like mine for eight years,
it were hard if I could not be justly thought to be able to do that.

     [Though our journalist prided himself not a little upon becoming
     possessed of a carriage, the acquisition was regarded with envy and
     jealousy by his enemies, as will appear by the following extract
     from the scurrilous pamphlet, “A Hue and Cry after P. and H. and
     Plain Truth (or a Private Discourse between P. and H.),” in which
     Pepys and Hewer are severely handled: “There is one thing more you
     must be mightily sorry for with all speed.  Your presumption in your
     coach, in which you daily ride, as if you had been son and heir to
     the great Emperor Neptune, or as if you had been infallibly to have
     succeeded him in his government of the Ocean, all which was
     presumption in the highest degree.  First, you had upon the fore
     part of your chariot, tempestuous waves and wrecks of ships; on your
     left hand, forts and great guns, and ships a-fighting; on your right
     hand was a fair harbour and galleys riding, with their flags and
     pennants spread, kindly saluting each other, just like P[epys] and
     H[ewer]. Behind it were high curled waves and ships a-sinking, and
     here and there an appearance of some bits of land.”]

He gone, my wife and I to supper; and so she to read, and made an end of
the Life of Archbishop Laud, which is worth reading, as informing a
man plainly in the posture of the Church, and how the things of it were
managed with the same self-interest and design that every other thing
is, and have succeeded accordingly. So to bed.