23rd. Up, and called upon by W. Howe, who went, with W. Hewer with me,
by water, to the Temple; his business was to have my advice about a
place he is going to buy--the Clerk of the Patent’s place, which I
understand not, and so could say little to him, but fell to other talk,
and setting him in at the Temple, we to White Hall, and there I to visit
Lord Sandwich, who is now so reserved, or moped rather, I think, with
his own business, that he bids welcome to no man, I think, to his
satisfaction. However, I bear with it, being willing to give him as
little trouble as I can, and to receive as little from him, wishing only
that I had my money in my purse, that I have lent him; but, however,
I shew no discontent at all. So to White Hall, where a Committee of
Tangier expected, but none met. I met with Mr. Povy, who I discoursed
with about publick business, who tells me that this discourse which I
told him of, of the Duke of Monmouth being made Prince of Wales, hath
nothing in it; though he thinks there are all the endeavours used in the
world to overthrow the Duke of York. He would not have me doubt of my
safety in the Navy, which I am doubtful of from the reports of a general
removal; but he will endeavour to inform me, what he can gather from my
Lord Arlington. That he do think that the Duke of Buckingham hath a
mind rather to overthrow all the kingdom, and bring in a Commonwealth,
wherein he may think to be General of their Army, or to make himself
King, which, he believes, he may be led to, by some advice he hath had
with conjurors, which he do affect. Thence with W. Hewer, who goes up
and down with me like a jaylour, but yet with great love and to my
great good liking, it being my desire above all things to please my
wife therein. I took up my wife and boy at Unthank’s, and from there to
Hercules Pillars, and there dined, and thence to our upholster’s,
about some things more to buy, and so to see our coach, and so to the
looking-glass man’s, by the New Exchange, and so to buy a picture for
our blue chamber chimney, and so home; and there I made my boy to read
to me most of the night, to get through the Life of the Archbishop of
Canterbury. At supper comes Mary Batelier, and with us all the evening,
prettily talking, and very innocent company she is; and she gone, we
with much content to bed, and to sleep, with mighty rest all night.