9th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning we sat. Here I first
hear that the Queene hath miscarryed of a perfect child, being gone
about ten weeks, which do shew that she can conceive, though it be
unfortunate that she cannot bring forth. Here we are told also that last
night the Duchesse of Monmouth, dancing at her lodgings, hath sprained
her thigh. Here we are told also that the House of Commons sat till five
o’clock this morning, upon the business of the difference between the
Lords and them, resolving to do something therein before they rise, to
assert their privileges. So I at noon by water to Westminster, and there
find the King hath waited in the Prince’s chamber these two hours, and
the Houses are not ready for him. The Commons having sent this morning,
after their long debate therein the last night, to the Lords, that
they do think the only expedient left to preserve unity between the two
Houses is, that they do put a stop to any proceedings upon their late
judgement against the East India Company, till their next meeting; to
which the Lords returned answer that they would return answer to them by
a messenger of their own, which they not presently doing, they were all
inflamed, and thought it was only a trick, to keep them in suspense
till the King come to adjourne them; and, so, rather than lose the
opportunity of doing themselves right, they presently with great fury
come to this vote: “That whoever should assist in the execution of the
judgement of the Lords against the Company, should be held betrayers of
the liberties of the people of England, and of the privileges of
that House.” This the Lords had notice of, and were mad at it; and so
continued debating without any design to yield to the Commons, till the
King come in, and sent for the Commons, where the Speaker made a short
but silly speech, about their giving Him L300,000; and then the several
Bills, their titles were read, and the King’s assent signified in the
proper terms, according to the nature of the Bills, of which about
three or four were public Bills, and seven or eight private ones, the
additional Bills for the building of the City and the Bill against
Conventicles being none of them. The King did make a short, silly
speech, which he read, giving them thanks for the money, which now,
he said, he did believe would be sufficient, because there was peace
between his neighbours, which was a kind of a slur, methought, to the
Commons; and that he was sorry for what he heard of difference between
the two Houses, but that he hoped their recesse would put them into a
way of accommodation; and so adjourned them to the 9th of August, and
then recollected himself, and told them the 11th; so imperfect a speaker
he is. So the Commons went to their House, and forthwith adjourned; and
the Lords resumed their House, the King being gone, and sat an hour or
two after, but what they did, I cannot tell; but every body expected
they would commit Sir Andrew Rickard, Sir Samuel Barnardiston, Mr.
Boone, and Mr. Wynne, who were all there, and called in, upon their
knees, to the bar of the House; and Sir John Robinson I left there,
endeavouring to prevent their being committed to the Tower, lest he
should thereby be forced to deny their order, because of this vote of
the Commons, whereof he is one, which is an odde case.

     [This “odd case” was that of Thomas Skinner and the East India
     Company.  According to Ralph, the Commons had ordered Skinner, the
     plaintiff, into the custody of the Serjeant-at-Arms, and the Lords
     did the same by Sir Samuel Barnadiston, deputy-governor of the
     company, as likewise Sir Andrew Rickard, Mr. Rowland Gwynn, and Mr.
     Christopher Boone.--B.]

Thence I to the Rose Taverne in Covent Garden, and there sent for a
pullet and dined all alone, being to meet Sir W. Pen, who by and
by come, and he and I into the King’s house, and there “The Mayd’s
Tragedy,” a good play, but Knepp not there; and my head and eyes out of
order, the first from my drinking wine at dinner, and the other from my
much work in the morning. Thence parted, and I towards the New Exchange
and there bought a pair of black silk stockings at the hosier’s that
hath the very pretty woman to his wife, about ten doors on this side
of the ‘Change, and she is indeed very pretty, but I think a notable
talking woman by what I heard to others there. Thence to Westminster
Hall, where I hear the Lords are up, but what they have done I know not,
and so walked toward White Hall and thence by water to the Tower, and so
home and there to my letters, and so to Sir W. Pen’s; and there did talk
with Mrs. Lowther, who is very kind to me, more than usual, and I will
make use of it. She begins to draw very well, and I think do as well, if
not better, than my wife, if it be true that she do it herself, what she
shews me, and so to bed, and my head akeing all night with the wine I
drank to-day, and my eyes ill. So lay long, my head pretty well in the
morning.