10th. Up, and by water to White Hall, and thence to Sir W. Coventry, but
he is gone out of town this morning, so thence to my Lord Arlington’s
house, the first time I there since he come thither, at Goring House,
a very fine, noble place; and there he received me in sight of several
Lords with great respect. I did give him an account of my journey; and
here, while I waited for him a little, my Lord Orrery took notice of me,
and begun discourse of hangings, and of the improvement of shipping: I
not thinking that he knew me, but did then discover it, with a mighty
compliment of my abilities and ingenuity, which I am mighty proud of;
and he do speak most excellently. Thence to Westminster Hall, and so by
coach to the old Exchange, and there did several businesses, and so home
to dinner, and then abroad to Duck Lane, where I saw my belle femme of
the book vendor, but had no opportunity para hazer con her. So away to
Cooper’s, where I spent all the afternoon with my wife and girl, seeing
him-make an end of her picture, which he did Jo my great content, though
not so great as, I confess, I expected, being not satisfied in the
greatness of the resemblance, nor in the blue garment: but it is most
certainly a most rare piece of work, as to the painting. He hath L30 for
his work--and the chrystal, and case, and gold case comes to L8 3s. 4d.;
and which I sent him this night, that I might be out of debt. Thence my
people home, and I to Westminster Hall about a little business, and
so by water home [to] supper, and my wife to read a ridiculous book I
bought today of the History of the Taylors’ Company,

     [The title of this book was, “The Honour of the Merchant Taylors.”
      Wherein is set forth the noble acts, valliant deeds, and heroick
     performances of Merchant Taylors in former ages; their honourable
     loves, and knightly adventures, their combating of foreign enemies
     and glorious successes in honour of the English nation: together
     with their pious....]

and all the while Deb. did comb my head, and I did toker her with my
main para very great pleasure, and so to bed.