26th. Rose, and up and by water to White Hall, but with my mind mightily
troubled for the poor girle, whom I fear I have undone by this, my
[wife] telling me that she would turn her out of doors. However, I was
obliged to attend the Duke of York, thinking to have had a meeting of
Tangier to-day, but had not; but he did take me and Mr. Wren into his
closet, and there did press me to prepare what I had to say upon the
answers of my fellow-officers to his great letter, which I promised
to do against his coming to town again, the next week; and so to other
discourse, finding plainly that he is in trouble, and apprehensions of
the Reformers, and would be found to do what he can towards reforming,
himself. And so thence to my Lord Sandwich’s, where, after long stay,
he being in talk with others privately, I to him; and there he, taking
physic and keeping his chamber, I had an hour’s talk with him about the
ill posture of things at this time, while the King gives countenance to
Sir Charles Sidly and Lord Buckhurst, telling him their late story of
running up and down the streets a little while since all night, and
their being beaten and clapped up all night by the constable, who is
since chid and imprisoned for his pains. He tells me that he thinks his
matters do stand well with the King, and hopes to have dispatch to his
mind; but I doubt it, and do see that he do fear it, too. He told me my
Lady Carteret’s trouble about my writing of that letter of the Duke of
York’s lately to the Office, which I did not own, but declared to be
of no injury to G. Carteret, and that I would write a letter to him
to satisfy him therein. But this I am in pain how to do, without doing
myself wrong, and the end I had, of preparing a justification to myself
hereafter, when the faults of the Navy come to be found out however, I
will do it in the best manner I can. Thence by coach home and to dinner,
finding my wife mightily discontented, and the girle sad, and no words
from my wife to her. So after dinner they out with me about two or three
things, and so home again, I all the evening busy, and my wife full of
trouble in her looks, and anon to bed, where about midnight she wakes
me, and there falls foul of me again, affirming that she saw me hug and
kiss the girle; the latter I denied, and truly, the other I confessed
and no more, and upon her pressing me did offer to give her under my
hand that I would never see Mrs. Pierce more nor Knepp, but did promise
her particular demonstrations of my true love to her, owning some
indiscretions in what I did, but that there was no harm in it. She at
last upon these promises was quiet, and very kind we were, and so to
sleep, and