30th. Up betimes, and with W. Hewer, who is my guard, to White Hall, to
a Committee of Tangier, where the business of Mr. Lanyon

     [John Lanyon, agent of the Navy Commissioners at Plymouth.  The
     cause of complaint appears to have been connected with his contract
     for Tangier.  In 1668 a charge was made against Lanyon and Thomas
     Yeabsley that they had defrauded the king in the freighting of the
     ship “Tiger” (“Calendar of State Papers,” 1668-69, p. 138).]

took up all the morning; and where, poor man! he did manage his business
with so much folly, and ill fortune to boot, that the Board, before his
coming in, inclining, of their own accord, to lay his cause aside, and
leave it to the law, but he pressed that we would hear it, and it ended
to the making him appear a very knave, as well as it did to me a fool
also, which I was sorry for. Thence by water, Mr. Povy, Creed, and I,
to Arundell House, and there I did see them choosing their Council, it
being St. Andrew’s-day; and I had his Cross

     [The cross of St. Andrew, like that of St. Patrick, is a saltire.
     The two, combined with the red cross of St. George, form the Union
     flag.]

set on my hat, as the rest had, and cost me 2s., and so leaving them I
away by coach home to dinner, and my wife, after dinner, went the first
time abroad to take the maidenhead of her coach, calling on Roger Pepys,
and visiting Mrs. Creed, and my cozen Turner, while I at home all
the afternoon and evening, very busy and doing much work, to my great
content. Home at night, and there comes Mrs. Turner and Betty to see
us, and supped with us, and I shewed them a cold civility for fear of
troubling my wife, and after supper, they being gone, we to bed. Thus
ended this month, with very good content, that hath been the most sad
to my heart and the most expenseful to my purse on things of pleasure,
having furnished my wife’s closet and the best chamber, and a coach
and horses, that ever I yet knew in the world: and do put me into the
greatest condition of outward state that ever I was in, or hoped ever to
be, or desired: and this at a time when we do daily expect great changes
in this Office: and by all reports we must, all of us, turn out. But
my eyes are come to that condition that I am not able to work: and
therefore that, and my wife’s desire, make me have no manner of trouble
in my thoughts about it. So God do his will in it!