10th. Up, and by coach to Westminster, and there made a visit to Mr.
Godolphin, at his chamber; and I do find him a very pretty and able
person, a man of very fine parts, and of infinite zeal to my Lord
Sandwich; and one that says he is, he believes, as wise and able a
person as any prince in the world hath. He tells me that he meets with
unmannerly usage by Sir Robert Southwell, in Portugall, who would sign
with him in his negociations there, being a forward young man: but that
my Lord mastered him in that point, it being ruled for my Lord here,
at a hearing of a Committee of the Council. He says that if my Lord can
compass a peace between Spain and Portugall, and hath the doing of it
and the honour himself, it will be a thing of more honour than ever any
man had, and of as much advantage. Thence to Westminster Hall, where
the Hall mighty full: and, among other things, the House begins to sit
to-day, and the King come. But, before the King’s coming, the House of
Commons met; and upon information given them of a Bill intended to be
brought in, as common report said, for Comprehension, they did mightily
and generally inveigh against it, and did vote that the King should be
desired by the House (and the message delivered by the Privy-counsellers
of the House) that the laws against breakers of the Act of Uniformity
should be put in execution: and it was moved in the House that, if any
people had a mind to bring any new laws into the House, about religion,
they might come, as a proposer of new laws did in Athens, with ropes
about their necks. By and by the King comes to the Lords’ House, and
there tells them of his league with Holland, and the necessity of a
fleete, and his debts; and, therefore, want of money; and his desire
that they would think of some way to bring in all his Protestant
subjects to a right understanding and peace one with another; meaning
the Bill of Comprehension. The Commons coming to their House, it was
moved that the vote passed this morning might be suspended, because of
the King’s speech, till the House was full and called over, two days
hence: but it was denied, so furious they are against this Bill: and
thereby a great blow either given to the King or Presbyters, or, which
is the rather of the two, to the House itself, by denying a thing
desired by the King, and so much desired by much the greater part of the
nation. Whatever the consequence be, if the King be a man of any stomach
and heat, all do believe that he will resent this vote. Thence with
Creed home to my house to dinner, where I met with Mr. Jackson, and find
my wife angry with Deb., which vexes me. After dinner by coach away to
Westminster; taking up a friend of Mr. Jackson’s, a young lawyer, and
parting with Creed at White Hall. They and I to Westminster Hall, and
there met Roger Pepys, and with him to his chamber, and there read over
and agreed upon the Deed of Settlement to our minds: my sister to have
L600 presently, and she to be joyntured in L60 per annum; wherein I
am very well satisfied. Thence I to the Temple to Charles Porter’s
lodgings, where Captain Cocke met me, and after long waiting, on
Pemberton,

     [Francis Pemberton, afterwards knighted, and made Lord Chief Justice
     of the King’s Bench in 1679.  His career was a most singular one, he
     having been twice removed from the Bench, and twice imprisoned by
     the House of Commons.  He twice returned to the bar, and after his
     second return he practised with great success as a serjeant for the
     next fourteen years till his death, June 10th, 1697.  Evelyn says,
     “He was held to be the most learned of the judges and an honest man”
      (“Diary,” October 4th, 1683).]

an able lawyer, about the business of our prizes, and left the matter
with him to think of against to-morrow, this being a matter that do much
trouble my mind, though there be no fault in it that I need fear the
owning that I know of. Thence with Cocke home to his house and there
left him, and I home, and there got my wife to read a book I bought
to-day, and come out to-day licensed by Joseph Williamson for Lord
Arlington, shewing the state of England’s affairs relating to France at
this time, and the whole body of the book very good and solid, after
a very foolish introduction as ever I read, and do give a very good
account of the advantage of our league with Holland at this time. So,
vexed in my mind with the variety of cares I have upon me, and so to
bed.