5th. Up, and Willet come home in the morning, and, God forgive me! I
could not conceal my content thereat by smiling, and my wife observed
it, but I said nothing, nor she, but away to the office. Presently up
by water to White Hall, and there all of us to wait on the Duke of York,
which we did, having little to do, and then I up and down the house,
till by and by the Duke of York, who had bid me stay, did come to his
closet again, and there did call in me and Mr. Wren; and there my paper,
that I have lately taken pains to draw up, was read, and the Duke of
York pleased therewith; and we did all along conclude upon answers to
my mind for the Board, and that that, if put in execution, will do the
King’s business. But I do now more and more perceive the Duke of York’s
trouble, and that he do lie under great weight of mind from the Duke
of Buckingham’s carrying things against him; and particularly when I
advised that he would use his interest that a seaman might come into the
room of W. Pen, who is now declared to be gone from us to that of the
Victualling, and did shew how the Office would now be left without one
seaman in it, but the Surveyour and the Controller, who is so old as
to be able to do nothing, he told me plainly that I knew his mind well
enough as to seamen, but that it must be as others will. And Wren did
tell it me as a secret, that when the Duke of York did first tell the
King about Sir W. Pen’s leaving of the place, and that when the Duke of
York did move the King that either Captain Cox or Sir Jer. Smith might
succeed him, the King did tell him that that was a matter fit to be
considered of, and would not agree to either presently; and so the Duke
of York could not prevail for either, nor knows who it shall be.
The Duke of York did tell me himself, that if he had not carried it
privately when first he mentioned Pen’s leaving his place to the King,
it had not been done; for the Duke of Buckingham and those of his party
do cry out upon it, as a strange thing to trust such a thing into the
hands of one that stands accused in Parliament: and that they have so
far prevailed upon the King that he would not have him named in Council,
but only take his name to the Board; but I think he said that only D.
Gawden’s name shall go in the patent; at least, at the time when Sir
Richard Browne asked the King the names of D. Gawden’s security, the
King told him it was not yet necessary for him to declare them. And by
and by, when the Duke of York and we had done, and Wren brought into
the closet Captain Cox and James Temple About business of the Guiney
Company, and talking something of the Duke of Buckingham’s concernment
therein, and says the Duke of York, “I will give the Devil his due, as
they say the Duke of Buckingham hath paid in his money to the Company,”
 or something of that kind, wherein he would do right to him. The Duke
of York told me how these people do begin to cast dirt upon the business
that passed the Council lately, touching Supernumeraries, as passed by
virtue of his authority there, there being not liberty for any man to
withstand what the Duke of York advises there; which, he told me, they
bring only as an argument to insinuate the putting of the Admiralty into
Commission, which by all men’s discourse is now designed, and I perceive
the same by him. This being done, and going from him, I up and down the
house to hear news: and there every body’s mouth full of changes; and,
among others, the Duke of York’s regiment of Guards, that was raised
during the late war at sea, is to be disbanded: and also, that this day
the King do intend to declare that the Duke of Ormond is no more Deputy
of Ireland, but that he will put it into Commission. This day our new
Treasurers did kiss the King’s hand, who complimented them, as they say,
very highly, that he had for a long time been abused in his Treasurer,
and that he was now safe in their hands. I saw them walk up and down the
Court together all this morning; the first time I ever saw Osborne, who
is a comely gentleman. This day I was told that my Lord Anglesey did
deliver a petition on Wednesday in Council to the King, laying open,
that whereas he had heard that his Majesty had made such a disposal of
his place, which he had formerly granted him for life upon a valuable
consideration, and that, without any thing laid to his charge, and
during a Parliament’s sessions, he prayed that his Majesty would be
pleased to let his case be heard before the Council and the judges of
the land, who were his proper counsel in all matters of right: to which,
I am told, the King, after my Lord’s being withdrawn, concluded upon his
giving him an answer some few days hence; and so he was called in, and
told so, and so it ended. Having heard all this I took coach and to Mr.
Povy’s, where I hear he is gone to the Swedes Resident in Covent Garden,
where he is to dine. I went thither, but he is not come yet, so I to
White Hall to look for him, and up and down walking there I met with Sir
Robert Holmes, who asking news I told him of Sir W. Pen’s going from us,
who ketched at it so as that my heart misgives me that he will have a
mind to it, which made me heartily sorry for my words, but he invited
me and would have me go to dine with him at the Treasurer’s, Sir Thomas
Clifford, where I did go and eat some oysters; which while we were at,
in comes my Lord Keeper and much company; and so I thought it best to
withdraw. And so away, and to the Swedes Agent’s, and there met Mr.
Povy; where the Agent would have me stay and dine, there being only
them, and Joseph Williamson, and Sir Thomas Clayton; but what he is I
know not. Here much extraordinary noble discourse of foreign princes,
and particularly the greatness of the King of France, and of his being
fallen into the right way of making the kingdom great, which [none] of
his ancestors ever did before. I was mightily pleased with this company
and their discourse, so as to have been seldom so much in all my life,
and so after dinner up into his upper room, and there did see a piece of
perspective, but much inferior to Mr. Povy’s. Thence with Mr. Povy spent
all the afternoon going up and down among the coachmakers in Cow Lane,
and did see several, and at last did pitch upon a little chariott,
whose body was framed, but not covered, at the widow’s, that made Mr.
Lowther’s fine coach; and we are mightily pleased with it, it being
light, and will be very genteel and sober: to be covered with leather,
and yet will hold four. Being much satisfied with this, I carried him to
White Hall; and so by coach home, where give my wife a good account of
my day’s work, and so to the office, and there late, and so to bed.