21st. Up, and betimes Sir D. Gawden with me talking about the
Victualling business, which is now under dispute for a new contract, or
whether it shall be put into a Commission. He gone, comes Mr. Hill to
talk with me about Lanyon’s business, and so being in haste I took him
to the water with me, and so to White Hall, and there left him, and I
to Sir W. Coventry, and shewed him my answer to the Duke of York’s great
letter, which he likes well. We also discoursed about the Victualling
business, which he thinks there is a design to put into a way of
Commission, but do look upon all things to be managed with faction, and
is grieved under it. So to St. James’s, and there the Duke of York did
of his own accord come to me, and tell me that he had read, and do like
of, my answers to the objections which he did give me the other day,
about the Navy; and so did W. Coventry too, who told me that the Duke of
York had shown him them: So to White Hall a little and the Chequer, and
then by water home to dinner with my people, where Tong was also this
day with me, whom I shall employ for a time, and so out again and by
water to Somerset House, but when come thither I turned back and
to Southwarke-Fair, very dirty, and there saw the puppet-show of
Whittington, which was pretty to see; and how that idle thing do work
upon people that see it, and even myself too! And thence to Jacob Hall’s
dancing on the ropes, where I saw such action as I never saw before,
and mightily worth seeing; and here took acquaintance with a fellow that
carried me to a tavern, whither come the musick of this booth, and by
and by Jacob Hall himself, with whom I had a mind to speak, to hear
whether he had ever any mischief by falls in his time. He told me, “Yes,
many; but never to the breaking of a limb:” he seems a mighty strong
man. So giving them a bottle or two of wine, I away with Payne, the
waterman. He, seeing me at the play, did get a link to light me, and so
light me to the Beare, where Bland, my waterman, waited for me with gold
and other things he kept for me, to the value of L40 and more, which I
had about me, for fear of my pockets being cut. So by link-light through
the bridge, it being mighty dark, but still weather, and so home, where
I find my draught of “The Resolution” come, finished, from Chatham; but
will cost me, one way or other, about L12 or L13, in the board, frame,
and garnishing, which is a little too much, but I will not be beholden
to the King’s officers that do it. So to supper, and the boy to read to
me, and so to bed. This day I met Mr. Moore in the New Exchange, and had
much talk of my Lord’s concernments. This day also come out first the
new five-pieces in gold, coined by the Guiny Company; and I did get two
pieces of Mr. Holder.

     [Guineas took their name from the gold brought from Guinea by the
     African Company in 1663, who, as an encouragement to bring over gold
     to be coined, were permitted by their charter from Charles II. to
     have their stamp of an elephant upon the coin.  When first coined
     they were valued at 20s., but were worth 30s. in 1695.  There were
     likewise fivepound pieces, like the guinea, with the inscription
     upon the rim.]