19th. When between two and three in the morning we were waked with my
maids crying out, “Fire, fire, in Markelane!” So I rose and looked out,
and it was dreadful; and strange apprehensions in me, and us all, of
being presently burnt. So we all rose; and my care presently was to
secure my gold, and plate, and papers, and could quickly have done it,
but I went forth to see where it was; and the whole town was presently
in the streets; and I found it in a new-built house that stood alone
in Minchin-lane, over against the Cloth-workers’-hall, which burned
furiously: the house not yet quite finished; and the benefit of brick
was well seen, for it burnt all inward, and fell down within itself;
so no fear of doing more hurt. So homeward, and stopped at Mr. Mills’s,
where he and she at the door, and Mrs. Turner, and Betty, and Mrs.
Hollworthy, and there I stayed and talked, and up to the church leads,
and saw the fire, which spent itself, till all fear over. I home, and
there we to bed again, and slept pretty well, and about nine rose, and
then my wife fell into her blubbering again, and at length had a request
to make to me, which was, that she might go into France, and live there,
out of trouble; and then all come out, that I loved pleasure and
denied her any, and a deal of do; and I find that there have been great
fallings out between my father and her, whom, for ever hereafter, I must
keep asunder, for they cannot possibly agree. And I said nothing, but,
with very mild words and few, suffered her humour to spend, till we
begun to be very quiet, and I think all will be over, and friends, and
so I to the office, where all the morning doing business. Yesterday I
heard how my Lord Ashly is like to die, having some imposthume in his
breast, that he hath been fain to be cut into the body.

     [“Such an operation was performed in this year, after a consultation
     of medical men, and chiefly by Locke’s advice, and the wound was
     afterwards always kept open, a silver pipe being inserted.  This
     saved Lord Ashley’s life, and gave him health”--Christie’s Life of
     the first Earl of Shaftesbury, vol. ii., p. 34.  ‘Tapski’ was a name
     given to Shaftesbury in derision, and vile defamers described the
     abscess, which had originated in a carriage accident in Holland, as
     the result of extreme dissipation.  Lines by Duke, a friend and
     imitator of Dryden:

              “The working ferment of his active mind,
               In his weak body’s cask with pain confined,
               Would burst the rotten vessel where ‘tis pent,
               But that ‘tis tapt to give the treason vent.”]

At noon home to dinner, and thence by coach to White Hall, where we
attended the Duke of York in his closet, upon our usual business. And
thence out, and did see many of the Knights of the Garter, with the King
and Duke of York, going into the Privychamber, to elect the Elector of
Saxony into that Order, who, I did hear the Duke of York say, was a good
drinker: I know not upon what score this compliment is done him. Thence
with W. Pen, who is in great pain of the gowte, by coach round by
Holborne home, he being at every kennel full of pain. Thence home, and
by and by comes my wife and Deb. home, have been at the King’s playhouse
to-day, thinking to spy me there; and saw the new play, “Evening Love,”
 of Dryden’s, which, though the world commends, she likes not. So to
supper and talk, and all in good humour, and then to bed, where I slept
not well, from my apprehensions of some trouble about some business of
Mr. Povy’s he told me of the other day.