18th. Up betimes to Westminster, where met with cozen Roger and Creed
and walked with them, and Roger do still continue of the mind that there
is no other way of saving this nation but by dissolving this Parliament
and calling another; but there are so many about the King that will not
be able to stand, if a new Parliament come, that they will not persuade
the King to it. I spent most of the morning walking with one or other,
and anon met Doll Lane at the Dog tavern, and there je did hater what I
did desire with her... and I did give her as being my valentine 20s.
to buy what elle would. Thence away by coach to my bookseller’s, and
to several places to pay my debts, and to Ducke Lane, and there bought
Montaigne’s Essays, in English, and so away home to dinner, and after
dinner with W. Pen to White Hall, where we and my Lord Brouncker
attended the Council, to discourse about the fitness of entering of men
presently for the manning of the fleete, before one ship is in condition
to receive them. W. Coventry did argue against it: I was wholly silent,
because I saw the King, upon the earnestness of the Prince, was willing
to it, crying very sillily, “If ever you intend to man the fleete,
without being cheated by the captains and pursers, you may go to bed,
and resolve never to have it manned;” and so it was, like other things,
over-ruled that all volunteers should be presently entered. Then there
was another great business about our signing of certificates to
the Exchequer for [prize] goods, upon the L1,20,000 Act, which the
Commissioners of the Treasury did all oppose, and to the laying fault
upon us. But I did then speak to the justifying what we had done, even
to the angering of Duncomb and Clifford, which I was vexed at: but, for
all that, I did set the Office and myself right, and went away with the
victory, my Lord Keeper saying that he would not advise the Council
to order us to sign no more certificates. But, before I began to say
anything in this matter, the King and the Duke of York talking at the
Council-table, before all the Lords, of the Committee of Miscarriages,
how this entering of men before the ships could be ready would be
reckoned a miscarriage; “Why,” says the King, “it is then but Mr. Pepys
making of another speech to them;” which made all the Lords, and there
were by also the Atturny and Sollicitor-Generall, look upon me. Thence
Sir W. Coventry, W. Pen and I, by hackney-coach to take a little ayre in
Hyde Parke, the first time I have been there this year; and we did meet
many coaches going and coming, it being mighty pleasant weather; and so,
coming back again, I ‘light in the Pell Mell; and there went to see Sir
H. Cholmly, who continues very ill of his cold. And there come in Sir H.
Yelverton, whom Sir H. Cholmly commended me to his acquaintance, which
the other received, but without remembering to me, or I him, of our
being school-fellows together; and I said nothing of it. But he took
notice of my speech the other day at the bar of the House; and indeed I
perceive he is a wise man by his manner of discourse, and here he do say
that the town is full of it, that now the Parliament hath resolved
upon L300,000, the King, instead of fifty, will set out but twenty-five
ships, and the Dutch as many; and that Smith is to command them, who is
allowed to have the better of Holmes in the late dispute, and is in good
esteem in the Parliament, above the other. Thence home, and there, in
favour to my eyes, stayed at home, reading the ridiculous History of
my Lord Newcastle, wrote by his wife, which shews her to be a mad,
conceited, ridiculous woman, and he an asse to suffer her to write what
she writes to him, and of him.

     [“The Life of the thrice noble, high, and puissant Prince, William
     Cavendish, Duke...  of Newcastle,” by his duchess, of which the
     first edition, in folio, was published in 1667.]

Betty Turner sent my wife the book to read, and it being a fair print,
to ease my eyes, which would be reading, I read that. Anon comes Mrs.
Turner and sat and talked with us, and most about the business of
Ackworth,

     [William Acworth, storekeeper at Woolwich, was accused of converting
     stores to his own use (see “Calendar of State Papers,” 1667-68, p.