27th. Up, and walked to the waterside, and thence to White Hall to the
Duke of York’s chamber, where he being ready he went to a Committee
of Tangier, where I first understand that my Lord Sandwich is, in his
coming back from Spayne, to step over thither, to see in what condition
the place is, which I am glad of, hoping that he will be able to do some
good there, for the good of the place, which is so much out of order.
Thence to walk a little in Westminster Hall, where the Parliament I find
sitting, but spoke with nobody to let me know what they are doing, nor
did I enquire. Thence to the Swan and drank, and did baiser Frank, and
so down by water back again, and to the Exchange a turn or two, only to
show myself, and then home to dinner, where my wife and I had a small
squabble, but I first this day tried the effect of my silence and not
provoking her when she is in an ill humour, and do find it very good,
for it prevents its coming to that height on both sides which used to
exceed what was fit between us. So she become calm by and by and fond,
and so took coach, and she to the mercer’s to buy some lace, while I
to White Hall, but did nothing, but then to Westminster Hall and took a
turn, and so to Mrs. Martin’s, and there did sit a little and talk and
drink, and did hazer con her, and so took coach and called my wife at
Unthanke’s, and so up and down to the Nursery, where they did not act,
then to the New Cockpit, and there missed, and then to Hide Parke, where
many coaches, but the dust so great, that it was troublesome, and so by
night home, where to my chamber and finished my pricking out of my song
for Mr. Harris (“It is decreed”), and so a little supper, being very
sleepy and weary since last night, and so by to o’clock to bed and slept
well all night. This day, at noon, comes Mr. Pelling to me, and shews
me the stone cut lately out of Sir Thomas Adams’ (the old comely
Alderman’s) body, which is very large indeed, bigger I think than my
fist, and weighs above twenty-five ounces and, which is very miraculous,
he never in all his life had any fit of it, but lived to a great age
without pain, and died at last of something else, without any sense of
this in all his life. This day Creed at White Hall in discourse told me
what information he hath had, from very good hands, of the cowardice and
ill-government of Sir Jer. Smith and Sir Thomas Allen, and the repute
they have both of them abroad in the Streights, from their deportment
when they did at several times command there; and that, above all
Englishmen that ever were there, there never was any man that behaved
himself like poor Charles Wager, whom the very Moores do mention, with
teares sometimes.