20th. Up betimes and to the getting ready my answer to the Committee of
Accounts to several questions, which makes me trouble, though I know of
no blame due to me from any, let them enquire what they can out.

     [The first part of the entry for April 20th is among the rough
     notes, and stands as follows:  “Monday 20.  Up and busy about answer
     to Committee of Accounts this morning about several questions which
     vexed me though in none I have reason to be troubled.  But the
     business of The Flying Greyhound begins to find me some care, though
     in that I am wholly void of blame.”  This may be compared with the
     text.]

I to White Hall, and there hear how Henry Brouncker is fled, which, I
think, will undo him: but what good it will do Harman I know not,
he hath so befooled himself; but it will be good sport to my Lord
Chancellor to hear how his great enemy is fain to take the same course
that he is. There met Robinson, who tells me that he fears his master,
W. Coventry, will this week have his business brought upon the stage
again, about selling of places, which I shall be sorry for, though the
less, since I hear his standing for Pen the other day, to the prejudice,
though not to the wrong, of my Lord Sandwich; and yet I do think what
he did, he did out of a principle of honesty. Thence to Committee of
Accounts, and delivered my paper, and had little discourse, and was
unwilling to stay long with them to enter into much, but away and glad
to be from them, though very civil to me, but cunning and close I see
they are. So to Westminster Hall, and there find the Parliament upon the
Irish business, where going into the Speaker’s chamber I did hear how
plainly one lawyer of counsel for the complainants did inveigh by name
against all the late Commissioners there. Thence with Creed, thinking,
but failed, of dining with Lord Crew, and so he and I to Hercules
Pillars, and there dined, and thence home by coach, and so with Jack
Fenn to the Chamberlain of London to look after the state of some Navy
assignments that are in his hands, and thence away, and meeting Sir
William Hooker, the Alderman, he did cry out mighty high against Sir
W. Pen for his getting such an estate, and giving L15,000 with his
daughter, which is more, by half, than ever he did give; but this the
world believes, and so let them. Thence took coach and I all alone to
Hyde Park (passing through Duck Lane among the booksellers, only to get
a sight of the pretty little woman I did salute the other night, and
did in passing), and so all the evening in the Park, being a little
unwilling to be seen there, and at night home, and thereto W. Pen’s and
sat and talked there with his wife and children a good while, he being
busy in his closet, I believe preparing his defence in Parliament, and
so home to bed.