26th. Could sleep but little last night, for my concernments in this
business of the victualling for Sir D. Gawden, so up in the morning and
he comes to me, and there I did tell him all, and give him my advice,
and so he away, and I to the office, where we met and did a little
business, and I left them and by water to attend the Council, which I
did all the morning, but was not called in, but the Council meets again
in the afternoon on purpose about it. So I at noon to Westminster Hall
and there stayed a little, and at the Swan also, thinking to have got
Doll Lane thither, but elle did not understand my signs; and so I away
and walked to Charing Cross, and there into the great new Ordinary, by
my Lord Mulgrave’s, being led thither by Mr. Beale, one of Oliver’s,
and now of the King’s Guards; and he sat with me while I had two grilled
pigeons, very handsome and good meat: and there he and I talked of our
old acquaintances, W. Clerke and others, he being a very civil man, and
so walked to Westminster and there parted, and I to the Swan again,
but did nothing, and so to White Hall, and there attended the King and
Council, who met and heard our answer. I present, and then withdrew; and
they sent two hours at least afterwards about it, and at last rose; and
to my great content, the Duke of York, at coming out, told me that
it was carried for D. Gawden at 6d. 8d., and 8 3/4d.; but with great
difficulty, I understand, both from him and others, so much that Sir
Edward Walker told me that he prays to God he may never live to need to
plead his merit, for D. Gawden’s sake; for that it hath stood him in
no stead in this business at all, though both he and all the world that
speaks of him, speaks of him as the most deserving man of any servant
of the King’s in the whole nation, and so I think he is: but it is done,
and my heart is glad at it. So I took coach and away, and in Holborne
overtook D. Gawden’s coach, and stopped and went home, and Gibson to
come after, and to my house, where D. Gawden did talk a little, and he
do mightily acknowledge my kindness to him, and I know I have done the
King and myself good service in it. So he gone, and myself in mighty
great content in what is done, I to the office a little, and then home
to supper, and the boy to read to me, and so to bed. This noon I went to
my Lady Peterborough’s house, and talked with her about the money due
to her Lord, and it gives me great trouble, her importunity and
impertinency about it. This afternoon at Court I met with Lord
Hinchingbroke, newly come out of the country, who tells me that Creed’s
business with Mrs. Pickering will do, which I am neither troubled nor
glad at.