26th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning almost, busy about
business against the afternoon, and we met a little to sign two or three
things at the Board of moment, and thence at noon home to dinner, and so
away to White Hall by water. In my way to the Old Swan, finding a great
many people gathered together in Cannon Street about a man that was
working in the ruins, and the ground did sink under him, and he sunk in,
and was forced to be dug out again, but without hurt. Thence to White
Hall, and it is strange to say with what speed the people employed do
pull down Paul’s steeple, and with what ease: it is said that it, and
the choir are to be taken down this year, and another church begun
in the room thereof, the next. At White Hall we met at the Treasury
chamber, and there before the Lords did debate our draft of the
victualling contract with the several bidders for it, which were Sir D.
Gawden, Mr. Child and his fellows, and Mr. Dorrington and his, a poor
variety in a business of this value. There till after candle-lighting,
and so home by coach with Sir D. Gawden, who, by the way, tells me how
the City do go on in several things towards the building of the public
places, which I am glad to hear; and gives hope that in a few years it
will be a glorious place; but we met with several stops and new troubles
in the way in the streets, so as makes it bad to travel in the dark now
through the City. So I to Mr. Batelier’s by appointment, where I find
my wife, and Deb., and Mercer; Mrs. Pierce and her husband, son, and
daughter; and Knepp and Harris, and W. Batelier, and his sister Mary,
and cozen Gumbleton, a good-humoured, fat young gentleman, son to the
jeweller, that dances well; and here danced all night long, with a noble
supper; and about two in the morning the table spread again for a noble
breakfast beyond all moderation, that put me out of countenance, so much
and so good. Mrs. Pierce and her people went home betimes, she being
big with child; but Knepp and the rest staid till almost three in the
morning, and then broke up.