5th (Lord’s day). Up, and to my chamber, and there to the writing fair
some of my late musique notions, and so to church, where I have not been
a good while, and thence home, and dined at home, with W. Hewer with
me; and after dinner, he and I a great deal of good talk touching this
Office, how it is spoiled by having so many persons in it, and so much
work that is not made the work of any one man, but of all, and so is
never done; and that the best way to have it well done, were to have
the whole trust in one, as myself, to set whom I pleased to work in
the several businesses of the Office, and me to be accountable for the
whole, and that would do it, as I would find instruments: but this is
not to be compassed; but something I am resolved to do about Sir J.
Minnes before it be long. Then to my chamber again, to my musique, and
so to church; and then home, and thither comes Captain Silas Taylor to
me, the Storekeeper of Harwich, where much talk, and most of it against
Captain Deane, whom I do believe to be a high, proud fellow; but he is
an active man, and able in his way, and so I love him. He gone, I to my
musique again, and to read a little, and to sing with Mr. Pelling, who
come to see me, and so spent the evening, and then to supper and to
bed. I hear that eight of the ringleaders in the late tumults of the
‘prentices at Easter are condemned to die.

     [Four were executed on May 9th, namely, Thomas Limmerick, Edward
     Cotton, Peter Massenger, and Richard Beasley.  They were drawn,
     hanged, and quartered at Tyburn, and two of their heads fixed upon
     London Bridge (“The London Gazette,” No. 259).  See “The Tryals of
     such persons as under the notion of London Apprentices were
     tumultuously assembled in Moore Fields, under colour of pulling down
     bawdy-houses,” 4to., London, 1668.  “It is to be observed,” says
     “The London Gazette,”  “to the just vindication of the City, that
     none of the persons apprehended upon the said tumult were found to
     be apprentices, as was given out, but some idle persons, many of
     them nursed in the late Rebellion, too readily embracing any
     opportunity of making their own advantages to the disturbance of the
     peace, and injury of others.”]