2nd. Up, and with Sir J. Minnes by coach to White Hall, and there
attended the King and the Duke of York in the Duke of York’s lodgings,
with the rest of the Officers and many of the Commanders of the fleete,
and some of our master shipwrights, to discourse the business of having
the topmasts of ships made to lower abaft of the mainmast; a business
I understand not, and so can give no good account; but I do see that by
how much greater the Council, and the number of Counsellors is, the more
confused the issue is of their councils; so that little was said to the
purpose regularly, and but little use was made of it, they coming to
a very broken conclusion upon it, to make trial in a ship or two. From
this they fell to other talk about the fleete’s fighting this late war,
and how the King’s ships have been shattered; though the King said that
the world would not have it that about ten or twenty ships in any fight
did do any service, and that this hath been told so to him himself, by
ignorant people. The Prince, who was there, was mightily surprised
at it, and seemed troubled: but the King told him that it was only
discourse of the world. But Mr. Wren whispered me in the eare, and said
that the Duke of Albemarle had put it into his Narrative for the House,
that not above twenty-five ships fought in the engagement wherein he
was, but that he was advised to leave it out; but this he did write
from sea, I am sure, or words to that effect: and did displease many
commanders, among others, Captain Batts, who the Duke of York said was
a very stout man, all the world knew; and that another was brought into
his ship that had been turned out of his place when he was a boatswain,
not long before, for being a drunkard. This the Prince took notice of,
and would have been angry, I think, but they let their discourse fall:
but the Duke of York was earnest in it. And the Prince said to me,
standing by me, “God damn me, if they will turn out every man that will
be drunk, they must turn out all the commanders in the fleete. What is
the matter if he be drunk, so when he comes to fight he do his work? At
least, let him be punished for his drunkenness, and not put out of his
command presently.” This he spoke, very much concerned for this idle
fellow, one Greene. After this the King began to tell stories of the
cowardice of the Spaniards in Flanders, when he was there, at the siege
of Mardike and Dunkirke; which was very pretty, though he tells them but
meanly. This being done I to Westminster Hall, and there staid a little:
and then home, and by the way did find with difficulty the Life of Sir
Philip Sidney (the book I mentioned yesterday). And the bookseller told
me that he had sold four, within this week or two, which is more than
ever he sold in all his life of them; and he could not imagine what
should be the reason of it: but I suppose it is from the same reason of
people’s observing of this part therein, touching his prophesying our
present condition here in England in relation to the Dutch, which is
very remarkable. So home to dinner, where Balty’s wife is come to town;
she come last night and lay at my house, but being weary was gone to bed
before I come home, and so I saw her not before. After dinner I took
my wife and her girl out to the New Exchange, and there my wife bought
herself a lace for a handkercher, which I do give her, of about L3, for
a new year’s gift, and I did buy also a lace for a band for myself, and
so home, and there to the office busy late, and so home to my chamber,
where busy on some accounts, and then to supper and to bed. This day my
wife shows me a locket of dyamonds worth about L40, which W. Hewer
do press her to accept, and hath done for a good while, out of his
gratitude for my kindness and hers to him. But I do not like that she
should receive it, it not being honourable for me to do it; and so do
desire her to force him to take it back again, he leaving it against her
will yesterday with her. And she did this evening force him to take it
back, at which she says he is troubled; but, however, it becomes me more
to refuse it, than to let her accept of it. And so I am well pleased
with her returning it him. It is generally believed that France is
endeavouring a firmer league with us than the former, in order to his
going on with his business against Spayne the next year; which I am, and
so everybody else is, I think, very glad of, for all our fear is, of
his invading us. This day, at White Hall, I overheard Sir W. Coventry
propose to the King his ordering of some particular thing in the
Wardrobe, which was of no great value; but yet, as much as it was, it
was of profit to the King and saving to his purse. The King answered
to it with great indifferency, as a thing that it was no great matter
whether it was done or no. Sir W. Coventry answered: “I see your Majesty
do not remember the old English proverb, ‘He that will not stoop for a
pin, will never be worth a pound.’” And so they parted, the King bidding
him do as he would; which, methought, was an answer not like a King that
did intend ever to do well.