18th. Up betimes and to the office, there to set my papers in order and
books, my office having been new whited and windows made clean, and so
to sit, where all the morning, and did receive a hint or two from my
Lord Anglesey, as if he thought much of my taking the ayre as I have
done; but I care not a turd; but whatever the matter is, I think he hath
some ill-will to me, or at least an opinion that I am more the servant
of the Board than I am. At noon home to dinner, where my wife still in a
melancholy, fusty humour, and crying, and do not tell me plainly what it
is; but I by little words find that she hath heard of my going to plays,
and carrying people abroad every day, in her absence; and that I cannot
help but the storm will break out, I think, in a little time. After
dinner carried her by coach to St. James’s, where she sat in the coach
till I to my Lady Peterborough’s, who tells me, among other things, her
Lord’s good words to the Duke of York lately, about my Lord Sandwich,
and that the Duke of York is kind to my Lord Sandwich, which I am glad
to hear: my business here was about her Lord’s pension from Tangier.
Here met with Povy, who tells me how hard Creed is upon him, though he
did give him, about six months since, I think he said, fifty pieces in
gold; and one thing there is in his accounts that I fear may touch me,
but I shall help it, I hope. So my wife not speaking a word, going nor
coming, nor willing to go to a play, though a new one, I to the Office,
and did much business. At night home, where supped Mr. Turner and his
wife, and Betty and Mercer and Pelling, as merry as the ill, melancholy
humour that my wife was in, would let us, which vexed me; but I took no
notice of it, thinking that will be the best way, and let it wear away
itself. After supper, parted, and to bed; and my wife troubled all
night, and about one o’clock goes out of the bed to the girl’s bed,
which did trouble me, she crying and sobbing, without telling the cause.
By and by she comes back to me, and still crying; I then rose, and would
have sat up all night, but she would have me come to bed again; and
being pretty well pacified, we to sleep.