8th. Up, and it being dirty, I by coach (which I was forced to go to
the charge for) to White Hall, and there did deliver the Duke of York a
memorial for the Council about the case of Tangiers want of money; and
I was called in there and my paper was read. I did not think fit to say
much, but left them to make what use they pleased of my paper; and so
went out and waited without all the morning, and at noon hear that there
is something ordered towards our help, and so I away by coach home,
taking up Mr. Prin at the Court-gate, it raining, and setting him down
at the Temple: and by the way did ask him about the manner of holding of
Parliaments, and whether the number of Knights and Burgesses were always
the same? And he says that the latter were not; but that, for aught
he can find, they were sent up at the discretion, at first, of the
Sheriffes, to whom the writs are sent, to send up generally the
Burgesses and citizens of their county: and he do find that heretofore
the Parliament-men being paid by the country, several burroughs have
complained of the Sheriffes putting them to the charge of sending up
Burgesses; which is a very extraordinary thing to me, that knew not
this, but thought that the number had been known, and always the
same. Thence home to the office, and so with my Lord Brouncker and his
mistress, Williams, to Captain Cocke’s to dinner, where was Temple
and Mr. Porter, and a very good dinner, and merry. Thence with Lord
Brouncker to White Hall to the Commissioners of the Treasury at their
sending for us to discourse about the paying of tickets, and so away,
and I by coach to the ‘Change, and there took up my wife and Mercer and
the girl by agreement, and so home, and there with Mercer to teach
her more of “It is decreed,” and to sing other songs and talk all the
evening, and so after supper I to even my journall since Saturday
last, and so to bed. Yesterday Mr. Gibson, upon his discovering by my
discourse to him that I had a willingness, or rather desire, to have him
stay with me, than go, as he designed, on Sir W. Warren’s account, to
sea, he resolved to let go the design and wait his fortune with me,
though I laboured hard to make him understand the uncertainty of my
condition or service, but however he will hazard it, which I take mighty
kindly of him, though troubled lest he may come to be a loser by it, but
it will not be for want of my telling him what he was to think on and
expect. However, I am well pleased with it, with regard to myself, who
find him mighty understanding and acquainted with all things in the
Navy, that I should, if I continue in the Navy, make great use of him.