6th. Up, and to the office, and thence to White Hall, but come too
late to see the Duke of York, with whom my business was, and so to
Westminster Hall, where met with several people and talked with them,
and among other things understand that my Lord St. John is meant by Mr.
Woodcocke, in “The Impertinents.”

        [“Whilst Positive walks, like Woodcock in the park,
          Contriving projects with a brewer’s clerk.”

     Andrew Marvell’s “Instructions to a Painter,” part iii., to which is
     subjoined the following note: “Sir Robert Howard, and Sir William
     Bucknell, the brewer.”--Works, ed.  by Capt.  E. Thompson, vol.
     iii., p. 405.--B.]

Here met with Mrs. Washington, my old acquaintance of the Hall, whose
husband has a place in the Excise at Windsor, and it seems lives well.
I have not seen her these 8 or 9 years, and she begins to grow old,
I perceive, visibly. So time do alter, and do doubtless the like in
myself. This morning the House is upon the City Bill, and they say hath
passed it, though I am sorry that I did not think to put somebody
in mind of moving for the churches to be allotted according to the
convenience of the people, and not to gratify this Bishop, or that
College. Thence by water to the New Exchange, where bought a pair of
shoe-strings, and so to Mr. Pierces, where invited, and there was Knepp
and Mrs. Foster and here dined, but a poor, sluttish dinner, as usual,
and so I could not be heartily merry at it: here saw her girl’s picture,
but it is mighty far short of her boy’s, and not like her neither; but
it makes Hales’s picture of her boy appear a good picture. Thence to
White Hall, walked with Brisband, who dined there also, and thence I
back to the King’s playhouse, and there saw “The Virgin Martyr,” and
heard the musick that I like so well, and intended to have seen Knepp,
but I let her alone; and having there done, went to Mrs. Pierces back
again, where she was, and there I found her on a pallet in the dark...,
that is Knepp. And so to talk; and by and by did eat some curds and
cream, and thence away home, and it being night, I did walk in the dusk
up and down, round through our garden, over Tower Hill, and so through
Crutched Friars, three or four times, and once did meet Mercer and
another pretty lady, but being surprized I could say little to them,,
although I had an opportunity of pleasing myself with them, but left
them, and then I did see our Nell, Payne’s daughter, and her je did
desire venir after me, and so elle did see me to, Tower Hill to our back
entry there that comes upon the degres entrant into nostra garden...,
and so parted, and je home to put up things against to-morrow’s carrier
for my wife; and, among others, a very fine salmon-pie, sent me by Mr.
Steventon, W. Hewer’s uncle, and so to bed.