27th. Up, and to the office, where some time upon Sir D. Gawden’s
accounts, and then I by water to Westminster for some Tangier orders,
and so meeting with Mr. Sawyers my old chamber-fellow, he and I by water
together to the Temple, he giving me an account of the base, rude usage,
which he and Sir G. Carteret had lately, before the Commissioners of
Accounts, where he was, as Counsel to Sir G. Carteret, which I was sorry
to hear, they behaving themselves like most insolent and ill-mannered
men. Thence by coach to the Exchange, and there met with Sir H. Cholmly
at Colvill’s; and there did give him some orders, and so home, and there
to the office again, where busy till two o’clock, and then with Sir
D. Gawden to his house, with my Lord Brouncker and Sir J. Minnes, to
dinner, where we dined very well, and much good company, among others,
a Dr., a fat man, whom by face I know, as one that uses to sit in our
church, that after dinner did take me out, and walked together, who told
me that he had now newly entered himself into Orders, in the decay of
the Church, and did think it his duty so to do, thereby to do his part
toward the support and reformation thereof; and spoke very soberly, and
said that just about the same age Dr. Donne did enter into Orders. I
find him a sober gentleman, and a man that hath seen much of the world,
and I think may do good. Thence after dinner to the office, and there
did a little business, and so to see Sir W. Pen, who I find still
very ill of the goute, sitting in his great chair, made on purpose for
persons sick of that disease, for their ease; and this very chair,
he tells me, was made for my Lady Lambert! Thence I by coach to my
tailor’s, there to direct about the making of me another suit, and so
to White Hall, and through St. James’s Park to St. James’s, thinking to
have met with Mr. Wren, but could not, and so homeward toward the New
Exchange, and meeting Mr. Creed he and I to drink some whey at the
whey-house, and so into the ‘Change and took a walk or two, and so home,
and there vexed at my boy’s being out of doors till ten at night, but
it was upon my brother Jackson’s business, and so I was the less
displeased, and then made the boy to read to me out of Dr. Wilkins his
“Real Character,” and particularly about Noah’s arke, where he do give
a very good account thereof, shewing how few the number of the several
species of beasts and fowls were that were to be in the arke, and that
there was room enough for them and their food and dung, which do please
me mightily and is much beyond what ever I heard of the subject, and so
to bed.