20th. Up, and with Colonell Middleton, in a new coach he hath made him,
very handsome, to White Hall, where the Duke of York having removed his
lodgings for this year to St. James’s, we walked thither; and there
find the Duke of York coming to White Hall, and so back to the
Council-chamber, where the Committee of the Navy sat; and here we
discoursed several things; but, Lord! like fools; so as it was a shame
to see things of this importance managed by a Council that understand
nothing of them: and, among other things, one was about this building
of a ship with Hemskirke’s secret, to sail a third faster than any other
ship; but he hath got Prince Rupert on his side, and by that means, I
believe, will get his conditions made better than he would otherwise, or
ought indeed. Having done there, I met with Sir Richard Browne, and he
took me to dinner with him to a new tavern, above Charing Cross, where
some clients of his did give him a good dinner, and good company; among
others, one Bovy, a solicitor, and lawyer and merchant all together, who
hath travelled very much, did talk some things well; but only he is a
“Sir Positive:” but the talk of their travels over the Alps very fine.
Thence walked to the King’s playhouse, and saw “The Mulberry Garden”
 again, and cannot be reconciled to it, but only to find here and there
an independent sentence of wit, and that is all. Here met with Creed;
and took him to Hales’s, and there saw the beginnings of Harris’s head
which he draws for me, which I do not yet like. So he and I down to the
New Exchange, and there cheapened ribbands for my wife, and so down to
the Whey house and drank some and eat some curds, which did by and by
make my belly ake mightily. So he and I to White Hall, and walked over
the Park to the Mulberry-Garden,

     [On the site of the present Buckingham Palace and gardens.
     Originally a garden of mulberry trees, planted by James I. in 1609
     with the intention of cultivating the manufacture of English silks.]

where I never was before; and find it a very silly place, worse than
Spring-garden, and but little company, and those a rascally, whoring,
roguing sort of people, only a wilderness here, that is somewhat pretty,
but rude. Did not stay to drink, but walked an hour and so away to
Charing Cross, and there took coach and away home, in my way going
into Bishopsgate Street, to bespeak places for myself and boy to go to
Cambridge in the coach this week, and so to Brampton, to see my wife. So
home, and to supper and to bed.