23rd (Lord’s day). Up betimes, my head busy in my great letter, and
I did first hang up my new map of Paris in my green room, and changed
others in other places. Then to Captain Cocke’s, thinking to have talked
more of what he told me yesterday, but he was not within. So back to
church, and heard a good sermon of Mr. Gifford’s at our church, upon
“Seek ye first the kingdom of Heaven and its righteousness, and all
these things shall be added to you.” A very excellent and persuasive,
good and moral sermon. Shewed, like a wise man, that righteousness is
a surer moral way of being rich, than sin and villainy. Then home
to dinner, where Mr. Pelting, who brought us a hare, which we had at
dinner, and W. Howe. After dinner to the Office, Mr. Gibson and I, to
examine my letter to the Duke of York, which, to my great joy, I did
very well by my paper tube, without pain to my eyes. And I do mightily
like what I have therein done; and did, according to the Duke of York’s
order, make haste to St. James’s, and about four o’clock got thither:
and there the Duke of York was ready, to expect me, and did hear it all
over with extraordinary content; and did give me many and hearty
thanks, and in words the most expressive tell me his sense of my good
endeavours, and that he would have a care of me on all occasions; and
did, with much inwardness,--[i.e., intimacy.]--tell me what was doing,
suitable almost to what Captain Cocke tells me, of designs to make
alterations in the Navy; and is most open to me in them, and with utmost
confidence desires my further advice on all occasions: and he resolves
to have my letter transcribed, and sent forthwith to the Office. So,
with as much satisfaction as I could possibly, or did hope for, and
obligation on the Duke of York’s side professed to me, I away into the
Park, and there met Mr. Pierce and his wife, and sister and brother,
and a little boy, and with them to Mulberry Garden, and spent I 18s. on
them, and there left them, she being again with child, and by it, the
least pretty that ever I saw her. And so I away, and got a coach, and
home, and there with my wife and W. Hewer, talking all the evening, my
mind running on the business of the Office, to see what more I can do to
the rendering myself acceptable and useful to all and to the King. We to
supper, and to bed.