9th. Up, and to the Office, but did little there, my mind being still
uneasy, though more and more satisfied that there is no occasion for it;
but abroad with my wife to the Temple, where I met with Auditor Wood’s
clerk, and did some business with him, and so to see Mr. Spong, and
found him out by Southampton Market, and there carried my wife, and up
to his chamber, a bye place, but with a good prospect of the fields;
and there I had most infinite pleasure, not only with his ingenuity
in general, but in particular with his shewing me the use of the
Parallelogram, by which he drew in a quarter of an hour before me,
in little, from a great, a most neat map of England--that is, all the
outlines, which gives me infinite pleasure, and foresight of pleasure,
I shall have with it; and therefore desire to have that which I have
bespoke, made. Many other pretty things he showed us, and did give me a
glass bubble, to try the strength of liquors with.

     [This seems to refer to the first form of the Hon. Robert Boyle’s
     hydrometer, which he described in a paper in the “Philosophical
     Transactions” for June, 1675, under the title of a “New Essay
     instrument.”  In this paper the author refers to a glass instrument
     exhibited many years before by himself, “consisting of a bubble
     furnished with a long and slender stem, which was to be put into
     several liquors to compare and estimate their specific gravity.”
      Boyle describes this glass bubble in a paper in “Philosophical
     Transactions,” vol. iv., No. 50, p. 1001, 1669, entitled, “The
     Weights of Water in Water with ordinary Balances and Weights.”]

This done, and having spent 6d. in ale in the coach, at the door of the
Bull Inn, with the innocent master of the house, a Yorkshireman, for his
letting us go through his house, we away to Hercules Pillars, and there
eat a bit of meat: and so, with all speed, back to the Duke of York’s
house, where mighty full again; but we come time enough to have a good
place in the pit, and did hear this new play again, where, though I
better understood it than before, yet my sense of it and pleasure was
just the same as yesterday, and no more, nor any body else’s about us.
So took our coach and home, having now little pleasure to look about
me to see the fine faces, for fear of displeasing my wife, whom I take
great comfort now, more than ever, in pleasing; and it is a real joy to
me. So home, and to my Office, where spent an hour or two; and so home
to my wife, to supper and talk, and so to bed.