19th. Up, and called on Mr. Pierce, who tells me that after all this ado
Ward is come to town, and hath appeared to the Commissioners of Accounts
and given such answers as he thinks will do every body right, and let
the world see that their great expectations and jealousies have been
vain in this matter of the prizes. The Commissioners were mighty
inquisitive whether he was not instructed by letters or otherwise
from hence from my Lord Sandwich’s friends what to say and do, and
particularly from me, which he did wholly deny, as it was true, I not
knowing the man that I know of. He tells me also that, for certain, Mr.
Vaughan is made Lord Chief justice, which I am glad of. He tells me,
too; that since my Lord of Ormond’s coming over, the King begins to be
mightily reclaimed, and sups every night with great pleasure with
the Queene: and yet, it seems, he is mighty hot upon the Duchess of
Richmond; insomuch that, upon Sunday was se’nnight, at night, after he
had ordered his Guards and coach to be ready to carry him to the Park,
he did, on a sudden, take a pair of oars or sculler, and all alone, or
but one with him, go to Somersett House, and there, the garden-door not
being open, himself clamber over the walls to make a visit to her,
which is a horrid shame. He gone, I to the office, where we sat all
the morning, Sir W. Pen sick of the gout comes not out. After dinner at
home, to White Hall, it being a very rainy day, and there a Committee
for Tangier, where I was mightily pleased to see Sir W. Coventry fall
upon my Lord Bellasses’ business of the 3d. in every piece of it which
he would get to himself, making the King pay 4s. 9d, while he puts them
off for 4s. 6d., so that Sir W. Coventry continues still the same man
for the King’s good. But here Creed did vex me with saying that I ought
first to have my account past by the Commissioners of Tangier before in
the Exchequer. Thence W. Coventry and I in the Matted gallery, and there
he did talk very well to me about the way to save the credit of the
officers of the Navy, and their places too, by making use of this
interval of Parliament to be found to be mending of matters in the
Navy, and that nothing but this will do it, and gives an instance in
themselves of the Treasury, whereof himself and Sir John Duncombe all
the world knows have enemies, and my Lord Ashly a man obnoxious to most,
and Sir Thomas Clifford one that as a man suddenly rising and a creature
of my Lord Arlington’s hath enemies enough (none of them being otherwise
but the Duke of Albemarle), yet with all this fault they hear nothing
of the business of the Treasury, but all well spoken of there. He is for
the removal of Sir John Minnes, thinking that thereby the world will see
a greater change in the hands than now they do; and I will endeavour it,
and endeavour to do some good in the office also. So home by coach,
and to the office, where ended my letters, and then home, and there got
Balty to read to me out of Sorbiere’s Observations in his Voyage into
England, and then to bed.