11th. Up, and my wife with me as before, and so to the Office, where,
by a speciall desire, the new Treasurers come, and there did shew their
Patent, and the Great Seal for the suspension of my Lord Anglesey: and
here did sit and discourse of the business of the Office: and brought
Mr. Hutchinson with them, who, I hear, is to be their Paymaster, in
the room of Mr. Waith. For it seems they do turn out every servant
that belongs to the present Treasurer: and so for Fenn, do bring in
Mr. Littleton, Sir Thomas’s brother, and oust all the rest. But Mr.
Hutchinson do already see that his work now will be another kind of
thing than before, as to the trouble of it. They gone, and, indeed, they
appear, both of them, very intelligent men, I home to dinner, and there
with my people dined, and so to my wife, who would not dine with [me]
that she might not have the girle come in sight, and there sat and
talked a while with her and pretty quiet, I giving no occasion of
offence, and so to the office [and then by coach to my cozen Roger
Pepys, who did, at my last being with him this day se’nnight, move me
as to the supplying him with L500 this term, and L500 the next, for two
years, upon a mortgage, he having that sum to pay, a debt left him by
his father, which I did agree to, trusting to his honesty and ability,
and am resolved to do it for him, that I may not have all I have lie in
the King’s hands. Having promised him this I returned home again, where
to the office], and there having done, I home and to supper and to
bed, where, after lying a little while, my wife starts up, and with
expressions of affright and madness, as one frantick, would rise, and
I would not let her, but burst out in tears myself, and so continued
almost half the night, the moon shining so that it was light, and after
much sorrow and reproaches and little ravings (though I am apt to think
they were counterfeit from her), and my promise again to discharge the
girle myself, all was quiet again, and so to sleep.