9th. Up, and I did by a little note which I flung to Deb. advise her
that I did continue to deny that ever I kissed her, and so she might
govern herself. The truth is that I did adventure upon God’s pardoning
me this lie, knowing how heavy a thing it would be for me to the ruin of
the poor girle, and next knowing that if my wife should know all it were
impossible ever for her to be at peace with me again, and so our whole
lives would be uncomfortable. The girl read, and as I bid her returned
me the note, flinging it to me in passing by. And so I abroad by [coach]
to White Hall, and there to the Duke of York to wait on him, who told me
that Sir W. Pen had been with him this morning, to ask whether it would
be fit for him to sit at the Office now, because of his resolution to
be gone, and to become concerned in the Victualling. The Duke of
York answered, “Yes, till his contract was signed:” Thence I to Lord
Sandwich’s, and there to see him; but was made to stay so long, as his
best friends are, and when I come to him so little pleasure, his head
being full of his own business, I think, that I have no pleasure [to]
go to him. Thence to White Hall with him, to the Committee of Tangier;
a day appointed for him to give an account of Tangier, and what he did,
and found there, which, though he had admirable matter for it, and his
doings there were good, and would have afforded a noble account, yet he
did it with a mind so low and mean, and delivered in so poor a manner,
that it appeared nothing at all, nor any body seemed to value it;
whereas, he might have shewn himself to have merited extraordinary
thanks, and been held to have done a very great service: whereas now,
all that cost the King hath been at for his journey through Spain
thither, seems to be almost lost. After we were up, Creed and I walked
together, and did talk a good while of the weak report my Lord made, and
were troubled for it; I fearing that either his mind and judgment are
depressed, or that he do it out of his great neglect, and so my fear
that he do all the rest of his affairs accordingly. So I staid about
the Court a little while, and then to look for a dinner, and had it at
Hercules-Pillars, very late, all alone, costing me 10d. And so to the
Excise Office, thinking to meet Sir Stephen Fox and the Cofferer, but
the former was gone, and the latter I met going out, but nothing done,
and so I to my bookseller’s, and also to Crow’s, and there saw a piece
of my bed, and I find it will please us mightily. So home, and there
find my wife troubled, and I sat with her talking, and so to bed, and
there very unquiet all night.