19th (Sunday). Lay long. Roger Pepys and his son come, and to Church
with me, where W. Pen was, and did endeavour to shew himself to the
Church. Then home to dinner, and Roger Pepys did tell me the whole story
of Harman, how he prevaricated, and hath undoubtedly been imposed on,
and wheedled; and he is called the miller’s man that, in Richard the
Third’s time, was hanged for his master.

     [The story alluded to by Pepys, which belongs not to the reign of
     Richard III., but to that of Edward VI., occurred during a seditious
     outbreak at Bodmin, in Cornwall, and is thus related by Holinshed:
     “At the same time, and neare the same place [Bodmin], dwelled a
     miller, that had beene a greate dooer in that rebellion, for whom
     also Sir Anthonie Kingston sought: but the miller being thereof
     warned, called a good tall fellow that he had to his servant, and
     said unto him, ‘I have business to go from home; if anie therefore
     come to ask for me, saie thou art the owner of the mill, and the man
     for whom they shall so aske, and that thou hast kept this mill for
     the space of three yeares; but in no wise name me.’  The servant
     promised his maister so to doo.  And shortlie after, came Sir
     Anthonie Kingston to the miller’s house, and calling for the miller,
     the servant came forth, and answered that he was the miller.  ‘How
     long,’ quoth Sir Anthonie, ‘hast thou kept this mill?’ He answered,
     ‘Three years.’--‘Well, then,’ said he, ‘come on: thou must go with
     me;’ and caused his men to laie hands on him, and to bring him to
     the next tree, saieing to him, ‘Thou hast been a busie knave, and
     therefore here shalt thou hang.’  Then cried the fellow out, and
     saide that he was not the miller, but the miller’s man.  ‘Well,
     then,’ said Sir Anthonie, ‘thou art a false knave to be in two
     tales: therefore,’ said he, ‘hang him up;’ and so incontinentlie
     hanged he was indeed.  After he was dead, one that was present told
     Sir Anthonie, ‘Surelie, sir, this was but the miller’s man.’--‘What
     then!’ said he, ‘could he ever have done his maister better service
     than to hang for him?’”--B.]

So after dinner I took them by water to White Hall, taking in a very
pretty woman at Paul’s Wharf, and there landed we, and I left Roger
Pepys and to St. Margaret’s Church, and there saw Betty, and so to walk
in the Abbey with Sir John Talbot, who would fain have pumped me about
the prizes, but I would not let him, and so to walk towards Michell’s to
see her, but could not, and so to Martin’s, and her husband was at home,
and so took coach and to the Park, and thence home and to bed betimes.