20th. This morning up, with mighty kind words between my poor wife and
I; and so to White Hall by water, W. Hewer with me, who is to go with
me every where, until my wife be in condition to go out along with me
herself; for she do plainly declare that she dares not trust me out
alone, and therefore made it a piece of our league that I should alway
take somebody with me, or her herself, which I am mighty willing to,
being, by the grace of God, resolved never to do her wrong more. We
landed at the Temple, and there I bid him call at my cozen Roger Pepys’s
lodgings, and I staid in the street for him, and so took water again at
the Strand stairs; and so to White Hall, in my way I telling him plainly
and truly my resolutions, if I can get over this evil, never to give
new occasion for it. He is, I think, so honest and true a servant to us
both, and one that loves us, that I was not much troubled at his being
privy to all this, but rejoiced in my heart that I had him to assist in
the making us friends, which he did truly and heartily, and with good
success, for I did get him to go to Deb. to tell her that I had told my
wife all of my being with her the other night, that so if my wife should
send she might not make the business worse by denying it. While I was at
White Hall with the Duke of York, doing our ordinary business with him,
here being also the first time the new Treasurers. W. Hewer did go to
her and come back again, and so I took him into St. James’s Park, and
there he did tell me he had been with her, and found what I said about
my manner of being with her true, and had given her advice as I desired.
I did there enter into more talk about my wife and myself, and he did
give me great assurance of several particular cases to which my wife had
from time to time made him privy of her loyalty and truth to me after
many and great temptations, and I believe them truly. I did also
discourse the unfitness of my leaving of my employment now in many
respects to go into the country, as my wife desires, but that I would
labour to fit myself for it, which he thoroughly understands, and do
agree with me in it; and so, hoping to get over this trouble, we about
our business to Westminster Hall to meet Roger Pepys, which I did, and
did there discourse of the business of lending him L500 to answer some
occasions of his, which I believe to be safe enough, and so took leave
of him and away by coach home, calling on my coachmaker by the way,
where I like my little coach mightily. But when I come home, hoping for
a further degree of peace and quiet, I find my wife upon her bed in a
horrible rage afresh, calling me all the bitter names, and, rising, did
fall to revile me in the bitterest manner in the world, and could not
refrain to strike me and pull my hair, which I resolved to bear with,
and had good reason to bear it. So I by silence and weeping did prevail
with her a little to be quiet, and she would not eat her dinner without
me; but yet by and by into a raging fit she fell again, worse than
before, that she would slit the girl’s nose, and at last W. Hewer come
in and come up, who did allay her fury, I flinging myself, in a sad
desperate condition, upon the bed in the blue room, and there lay while
they spoke together; and at last it come to this, that if I would call
Deb. whore under my hand and write to her that I hated her, and would
never see her more, she would believe me and trust in me, which I
did agree to, only as to the name of whore I would have excused, and
therefore wrote to her sparing that word, which my wife thereupon tore
it, and would not be satisfied till, W. Hewer winking upon me, I did
write so with the name of a whore as that I did fear she might too
probably have been prevailed upon to have been a whore by her carriage
to me, and therefore as such I did resolve never to see her more. This
pleased my wife, and she gives it W. Hewer to carry to her with a sharp
message from her. So from that minute my wife begun to be kind to me,
and we to kiss and be friends, and so continued all the evening, and
fell to talk of other matters, with great comfort, and after supper
to bed. This evening comes Mr. Billup to me, to read over Mr. Wren’s
alterations of my draught of a letter for the Duke of York to sign, to
the Board; which I like mighty well, they being not considerable, only
in mollifying some hard terms, which I had thought fit to put in. From
this to other discourse; and do find that the Duke of York and his
master, Mr. Wren, do look upon this service of mine as a very seasonable
service to the Duke of York, as that which he will have to shew to his
enemies in his own justification, of his care of the King’s business;
and I am sure I am heartily glad of it, both for the King’s sake and the
Duke of York’s, and my own also; for, if I continue, my work, by this
means, will be the less, and my share in the blame also. He being gone,
I to my wife again, and so spent the evening with very great joy, and
the night also with good sleep and rest, my wife only troubled in her
rest, but less than usual, for which the God of Heaven be praised. I did
this night promise to my wife never to go to bed without calling upon
God upon my knees by prayer, and I begun this night, and hope I shall
never forget to do the like all my life; for I do find that it is much
the best for my soul and body to live pleasing to God and my poor wife,
and will ease me of much care as well as much expense.