14th. At the office all the morning, and at noon home to dinner, and
after dinner with Mr. Clerke and Gibson to the Temple (my wife and
girle going further by coach), and there at the Auditor’s did begin the
examining my Tangier accounts, and did make a great entry into it and
with great satisfaction, and I am glad I am so far eased. So appointing
another day for further part of my accounts, I with Gibson to my
bookseller, Martin, and there did receive my book I expected of China,
a most excellent book with rare cuts; and there fell into discourse
with him about the burning of Paul’s when the City was burned; his house
being in the church-yard. And he tells me that it took fire first upon
the end of a board that, among others, was laid upon the roof instead
of lead, the lead being broke off, and thence down lower and lower: but
that the burning of the goods under St. Fayth’s arose from the goods
taking fire in the church-yard, and so got into St. Fayth’s Church; and
that they first took fire from the Draper’s side, by some timber of
the houses that were burned falling into the church. He says that one
warehouse of books was saved under Paul’s; and he says that there were
several dogs found burned among the goods in the church-yard, and but
one man, which was an old man, that said he would go and save a blanket
which he had in the church, and, being a weak old man, the fire overcome
him, and was burned. He says that most of the booksellers do design
to fall a-building again the next year; but he says that the Bishop of
London do use them most basely, worse than any other landlords, and says
he will be paid to this day the rent, or else he will not come to treat
with them for the time to come; and will not, on that condition either,
promise them any thing how he will use them; and, the Parliament
sitting, he claims his privilege, and will not be cited before the Lord
Chief justice, as others are there, to be forced to a fair dealing.
Thence by coach to Mrs. Pierce’s, where my wife and Deb. is; and there
they fell to discourse of the last night’s work at Court, where the
ladies and Duke of Monmouth and others acted “The Indian Emperour;”
 wherein they told me these things most remark able: that not any woman
but the Duchesse of Monmouth and Mrs. Cornwallis did any thing but like
fools and stocks, but that these two did do most extraordinary well:
that not any man did any thing well but Captain O’Bryan, who spoke and
did well, but, above all things, did dance most incomparably. That she
did sit near the players of the Duke’s house; among the rest, Mis Davis,
who is the most impertinent slut, she says, in the world; and the more,
now the King do show her countenance; and is reckoned his mistress, even
to the scorne of the whole world; the King gazing on her, and my Lady
Castlemayne being melancholy and out of humour, all the play, not
smiling once. The King, it seems, hath given her a ring of L700, which
she shews to every body, and owns that the King did give it her; and he
hath furnished a house for her in Suffolke Street most richly, which is
a most infinite shame. It seems she is a bastard of Colonell Howard, my
Lord Berkshire, and that he do pimp to her for the King, and hath got
her for him; but Pierce says that she is a most homely jade as ever she
saw, though she dances beyond any thing in the world. She tells me that
the Duchesse of Richmond do not yet come to the Court, nor hath seen
the King, nor will not, nor do he own his desire of seeing her; but hath
used means to get her to Court, but they do not take. Thence home, and
there I to my chamber, having a great many books brought me home from my
bookbinder’s, and so I to the new setting of my books against the next
year, which costs me more trouble than I expected, and at it till two
o’clock in the morning, and then to bed, the business not being yet done
to my mind. This evening come Mr. Mills and his wife to see and sit and
talk with us, which they did till 9 o’clock at night, and then parted,
and I to my books.