8th. Up, and Sir H. Cholmly betimes with me, about some accounts and
moneys due to him: and he gone, I to the Office, where sat all the
morning; and here, among other things, breaks out the storm W. Hewer and
I have long expected from the Surveyor,--[Colonel Middleton.]--about
W. Hewer’s conspiring to get a contract, to the burdening of the stores
with kerseys and cottons, of which he hath often complained, and lately
more than ever; and now he did it by a most scandalous letter to the
Board, reflecting on my Office: and, by discourse, it fell to such high
words between him and me, as can hardly ever be forgot; I declaring I
would believe W. Hewer as soon as him, and laying the fault, if there
be any, upon himself; he, on the other hand, vilifying of my word and
W. Hewer’s, calling him knave, and that if he were his clerk, he should
lose his ears. At last, I closed the business for this morning with
making the thing ridiculous, as it is, and he swearing that the King
should have right in it, or he would lose his place. The Office was
cleared of all but ourselves and W. Hewer; but, however, the world did
by the beginning see what it meant, and it will, I believe, come to high
terms between us, which I am sorry for, to have any blemish laid upon
me or mine, at this time, though never so unduly, for fear of giving
occasion to my real discredit: and therefore I was not only all the rest
of the morning vexed, but so went home to dinner, where my wife tells
me of my Lord Orrery’s new play “Tryphon,” at the Duke of York’s house,
which, however, I would see, and therefore put a bit of meat in our
mouths, and went thither; where, with much ado, at half-past one, we got
into a blind hole in the 18d. place, above stairs, where we could not
hear well, but the house infinite full, but the prologue most silly, and
the play, though admirable, yet no pleasure almost in it, because just
the very same design, and words, and sense, and plot, as every one of
his plays have, any one of which alone would be held admirable, whereas
so many of the same design and fancy do but dull one another; and this,
I perceive, is the sense of every body else, as well as myself, who
therefore showed but little pleasure in it. So home, mighty hot, and my
mind mightily out of order, so as I could not eat any supper, or sleep
almost all night, though I spent till twelve at night with W. Hewer to
consider of our business: and we find it not only most free from any
blame of our side, but so horrid scandalous on the other, to make so
groundless a complaint, and one so shameful to him, that it could not
but let me see that there is no need of my being troubled; but such is
the weakness of my nature, that I could not help it, which vexes me,
showing me how unable I am to live with difficulties.