28th. Up betimes, and Knepp’s maid comes to me, to tell me that the
women’s day at the playhouse is to-day, and that therefore I must be
there, to encrease their profit. I did give the pretty maid Betty that
comes to me half-a-crown for coming, and had a baiser or two-elle being
mighty jolie. And so I about my business. By water to St. James’s,
and there had good opportunity of speaking with the Duke of York, who
desires me again, talking on that matter, to prepare something for him
to do for the better managing of our Office, telling me that, my Lord
Keeper and he talking about it yesterday, my Lord Keeper did advise him
to do so, it being better to come from him than otherwise, which I have
promised to do. Thence to my Lord Burlington’s houses the first time
I ever was there, it being the house built by Sir John Denham, next to
Clarendon House; and here I visited my Lord Hinchingbroke and his lady;
Mr. Sidney Montagu being come last night to town unexpectedly from
Mount’s Bay, where he left my Lord well, eight days since, so as we may
now hourly expect to hear of his arrival at Portsmouth. Sidney is mighty
grown; and I am glad I am here to see him at his first coming, though
it cost me dear, for here I come to be necessitated to supply them with
L500 for my Lord. He sent him up with a declaration to his friends, of
the necessity of his being presently supplied with L2000; but I do not
think he will get one. However, I think it becomes my duty to my Lord to
do something extraordinary in this, and the rather because I have been
remiss in writing to him during this voyage, more than ever I did in
my life, and more indeed than was fit for me. By and by comes Sir W.
Godolphin to see Mr. Sidney, who, I perceive, is much dissatisfied
that he should come to town last night, and not yet be with my Lord
Arlington, who, and all the town, hear of his being come to town, and
he did, it seems, take notice of it to Godolphin this morning: so that I
perceive this remissness in affairs do continue in my Lord’s managements
still, which I am sorry for; but, above all, to see in what a condition
my Lord is for money, that I dare swear he do not know where to take up
L500 of any man in England at this time, upon his word, but of myself,
as I believe by the sequel hereof it will appear. Here I first saw and
saluted my Lady Burlington, a very fine-speaking lady, and a good woman,
but old, and not handsome; but a brave woman in her parts. Here my Lady
Hinchingbroke tells me that she hath bought most of the wedding-clothes
for Mrs. Dickering, so that the thing is gone through, and will soon
be ended; which I wonder at, but let them do as they will. Here I also,
standing by a candle that was brought for sealing of a letter, do set my
periwigg a-fire, which made such an odd noise, nobody could tell what
it was till they saw the flame, my back being to the candle. Thence to
Westminster Hall and there walked a little, and to the Exchequer, and so
home by water, and after eating a bit I to my vintner’s, and there did
only look upon su wife, which is mighty handsome; and so to my glove
and ribbon shop, in Fenchurch Street, and did the like there. And there,
stopping against the door of the shop, saw Mrs. Horsfall, now a late
widow, in a coach. I to her, and shook her by the hand, and so she away;
and I by coach towards the King’s playhouse, and meeting W. Howe took
him with me, and there saw “The City Match;” not acted these thirty
years, and but a silly play: the King and Court there; the house, for
the women’s sake, mighty full. So I to White Hall, and there all the
evening on the Queen’s side; and it being a most summerlike day, and a
fine warm evening, the Italians come in a barge under the leads, before
the Queen’s drawing-room; and so the Queen and ladies went out, and
heard them, for almost an hour: and it was indeed very good together;
but yet there was but one voice that alone did appear considerable, and
that was Seignor Joanni. This done, by and by they went in; and here
I saw Mr. Sidney Montagu kiss the Queen’s hand, who was mighty kind to
him, and the ladies looked mightily on him; and the King come by and by,
and did talk to him. So I away by coach with Alderman Backewell home,
who is mighty kind to me, more than ordinary, in his expressions. But I
do hear this day what troubles me, that Sir W. Coventry is quite out
of play, the King seldom speaking to him; and that there is a design of
making a Lord Treasurer, and that my Lord Arlington shall be the man;
but I cannot believe it. But yet the Duke of Buckingham hath it in his
mind, and those with him, to make a thorough alteration in things; and,
among the rest, Coventry to be out. The Duke of York did this day
tell me how hot the whole party was in the business of Gawden; and
particularly, my Lord Anglesey tells me, the Duke of Buckingham, for
Child against Gawden; but the Duke of York did stand stoutly to it. So
home to read and sup, and to bed.