11th. Up, and betimes to the office, where busy till 8 o’clock, and then
went forth, and meeting Mr. Colvill, I walked with, him to his building,
where he is building a fine house, where he formerly lived, in Lumbard
Street: and it will be a very fine street. Thence walked down to the
Three Cranes and there took boat to White Hall, where by direction I
waited on the Duke of York about office business, and so by water to
Westminster, where walking in the Hall most of the morning, and up to my
Lady Jem. in Lincoln’s Inn Fields to get her to appoint the day certain
when she will come and dine with me, and she hath appointed Saturday
next. So back to Westminster; and there still walked, till by and by
comes Sir W. Coventry, and with him Mr. Chichly and Mr. Andrew Newport,
I to dinner with them to Mr. Chichly’s, in Queene Street, in Covent
Garden. A very fine house, and a man that lives in mighty great fashion,
with all things in a most extraordinary manner noble and rich about him,
and eats in the French fashion all; and mighty nobly served with his
servants, and very civilly; that I was mighty pleased with it: and good
discourse. He is a great defender of the Church of England, and against
the Act for Comprehension, which is the work of this day, about which
the House is like to sit till night. After dinner, away with them back
to Westminster, where, about four o’clock, the House rises, and hath
done nothing more in the business than to put off the debate to this
day month. In the mean time the King hath put out his proclamations this
day, as the House desired, for the putting in execution the Act against
Nonconformists and Papists, but yet it is conceived that for all this
some liberty must be given, and people will have it. Here I met with
my cozen Roger Pepys, who is come to town, and hath been told of my
performance before the House the other day, and is mighty proud of it,
and Captain Cocke met me here to-day, and told me that the Speaker says
he never heard such a defence made; in all his life, in the House; and
that the Sollicitor-Generall do commend me even to envy. I carried
cozen Roger as far as the Strand, where, spying out of the coach
Colonel Charles George Cocke, formerly a very great man, and my father’s
customer, whom I have carried clothes to, but now walks like a poor
sorry sneake, he stopped, and I ‘light to him. This man knew me, which
I would have willingly avoided, so much pride I had, he being a man
of mighty height and authority in his time, but now signifies nothing.
Thence home, where to the office a while and then home, where W.
Batelier was and played at cards and supped with us, my eyes being out
of order for working, and so to bed.