12th. Up, and abroad, with my own coach, to Auditor Beale’s house, and
thence with W. Hewer to his Office, and there with great content spent
all the morning looking over the Navy accounts of several years, and
the several patents of the Treasurers, which was more than I did hope
to have found there. About noon I ended there, to my great content, and
giving the clerks there 20s. for their trouble, and having sent for
W. Howe to me to discourse with him about the Patent Office records,
wherein I remembered his brother to be concerned, I took him in my coach
with W. Hewer and myself towards Westminster; and there he carried me
to Nott’s, the famous bookbinder, that bound for my Lord Chancellor’s
library; and here I did take occasion for curiosity to bespeak a book
to be bound, only that I might have one of his binding. Thence back
to Graye’s Inne: and, at the next door, at a cook’s-shop of Howe’s
acquaintance, we bespoke dinner, it being now two o’clock; and in the
meantime he carried us into Graye’s Inne, to his chamber, where I never
was before; and it is very pretty, and little, and neat, as he was
always. And so, after a little stay, and looking over a book or two
there, we carried a piece of my Lord Coke with us, and to our dinner,
where, after dinner, he read at my desire a chapter in my Lord Coke
about perjury, wherein I did learn a good deal touching oaths, and so
away to the Patent Office; in Chancery Lane, where his brother Jacke,
being newly broke by running in debt, and growing an idle rogue, he is
forced to hide himself; and W. Howe do look after the Office, and here I
did set a clerk to look out some things for me in their books, while W.
Hewer and I to the Crowne Offices where we met with several good things
that I most wanted, and did take short notes of the dockets, and so back
to the Patent Office, and did the like there, and by candle-light ended.
And so home, where, thinking to meet my wife with content, after my
pains all this day, I find her in her closet, alone, in the dark, in a
hot fit of railing against me, upon some news she has this day heard of
Deb.’s living very fine, and with black spots, and speaking ill words of
her mistress, which with good reason might vex her; and the baggage is
to blame, but, God knows, I know nothing of her, nor what she do, nor
what becomes of her, though God knows that my devil that is within me
do wish that I could. Yet God I hope will prevent me therein, for I dare
not trust myself with it if I should know it; but, what with my high
words, and slighting it, and then serious, I did at last bring her to
very good and kind terms, poor heart! and I was heartily glad of it,
for I do see there is no man can be happier than myself, if I will, with
her. But in her fit she did tell me what vexed me all the night, that
this had put her upon putting off her handsome maid and hiring another
that was full of the small pox, which did mightily vex me, though I said
nothing, and do still. So down to supper, and she to read to me, and
then with all possible kindness to bed.