12th. Up, and by water to White Hall, where I of the whole Office
attended the Duke of York at his meeting with Sir Thomas Allen and
several flag-officers, to consider of the manner of managing the war
with Algiers; and, it being a thing I was wholly silent in, I did only
observe; and find that; their manner of discourse on this weighty affair
was very mean and disorderly, the Duke of York himself being the man
that I thought spoke most to the purpose. Having done here, I up and
down the house, talking with this man and that, and: then meeting Mr.
Sheres, took him to see the fine flower-pot I saw yesterday, and did
again offer L20 for it; but he [Verelst] insists upon L50. Thence I took
him to St. James’s, but there was no musique, but so walked to White
Hall, and, by and by to my wife at Unthanke’s, and with her was Jane,
and so to the Cocke, where they, and I, and Sheres, and Tom dined, my
wife having a great desire to eat of their soup made of pease, and dined
very well, and thence by water to the Bear-Garden, and there happened to
sit by Sir Fretcheville Hollis, who is still full of his vain-glorious
and prophane talk. Here we saw a prize fought between a soldier and
country fellow, one Warrell, who promised the least in his looks, and
performed the most of valour in his boldness and evenness of mind, and
smiles in all he did, that ever I saw and we were all both deceived and
infinitely taken with him. He did soundly beat the soldier, and cut him
over the head. Thence back to White Hall, mightily pleased, all of us,
with this sight, and particularly this fellow, as a most extraordinary
man for his temper and evenness in fighting. And there leaving Sheres,
we by our own coach home, and after sitting an hour, thrumming upon
my viall, and singing, I to bed, and left my wife to do something to a
waistcoat and petticoat she is to wear to-morrow. This evening, coming
home, we overtook Alderman Backewell’s coach and his lady, and followed
them to their house, and there made them the first visit, where they
received us with extraordinary civility, and owning the obligation.
But I do, contrary to my expectation, find her something a proud and
vain-glorious woman, in telling the number of her servants and family
and expences: he is also so, but he was ever of that strain. But here he
showed me the model of his houses that he is going to build in Cornhill
and Lumbard Street; but he hath purchased so much there, that it looks
like a little town, and must have cost him a great deal of money.