10th. Up, and with my wife and W. Hewer, she set us down at White Hall,
where the Duke of York was gone a-hunting: and so, after I had done a
little business there, I to my wife, and with her to the plaisterer’s at
Charing Cross, that casts heads and bodies in plaister: and there I had
my whole face done; but I was vexed first to be forced to daub all my
face over with pomatum: but it was pretty to feel how soft and easily
it is done on the face, and by and by, by degrees, how hard it becomes,
that you cannot break it, and sits so close, that you cannot pull
it off, and yet so easy, that it is as soft as a pillow, so safe is
everything where many parts of the body do bear alike. Thus was the
mould made; but when it came off there was little pleasure in it, as it
looks in the mould, nor any resemblance whatever there will be in the
figure, when I come to see it cast off, which I am to call for a day or
two hence, which I shall long to see. Thence to Hercules Pillars, and
there my wife and W. Hewer and I dined, and back to White Hall, where I
staid till the Duke of York come from hunting, which he did by and by,
and, when dressed, did come out to dinner; and there I waited: and he
did tell me that to-morrow was to be the great day that the business
of the Navy would be dis coursed of before the King and his Caball,
and that he must stand on his guard, and did design to have had me in
readiness by, but that upon second thoughts did think it better to let
it alone, but they are now upon entering into the economical part of the
Navy. Here he dined, and did mightily magnify his sauce, which he did
then eat with every thing, and said it was the best universal sauce in
the world, it being taught him by the Spanish Embassador; made of some
parsley and a dry toast, beat in a mortar, together with vinegar, salt,
and a little pepper: he eats it with flesh, or fowl, or fish: and then
he did now mightily commend some new sort of wine lately found out,
called Navarre wine, which I tasted, and is, I think, good wine: but I
did like better the notion of the sauce, and by and by did taste it, and
liked it mightily. After dinner, I did what I went for, which was to get
his consent that Balty might hold his Muster-Master’s place by deputy,
in his new employment which I design for him, about the Storekeeper’s
accounts; which the Duke of York did grant me, and I was mighty glad of
it. Thence home, and there I find Povy and W. Batelier, by appointment,
met to talk of some merchandize of wine and linnen; but I do not like of
their troubling my house to meet in, having no mind to their pretences
of having their rendezvous here, but, however, I was not much troubled,
but went to the office, and there very busy, and did much business till
late at night, and so home to supper, and with great pleasure to bed.
This day, at dinner, I sent to Mr. Spong to come to me to Hercules
Pillars, who come to us, and there did bring with him my new
Parallelogram of brass, which I was mightily pleased with, and paid for
it 25s., and am mightily pleased with his ingenious and modest company.