3rd. Up, and by coach to my Lord Brouncker’s, where Sir G. Carteret did
meet Sir J. Minnes and me, to discourse upon Mr. Deering’s business, who
was directed, in the time of the war, to provide provisions at Hamburgh,
by Sir G. Carteret’s direction; and now G. Carteret is afeard to own it,
it being done without written order. But by our meeting we do all begin
to recollect enough to preserve Mr. Deering, I think, which, poor
silly man! I shall be glad of, it being too much he should suffer for
endeavouring to serve us. Thence to St. James’s, where the Duke of York
was playing in the Pell Mell; and so he called me to him most part of
the time that he played, which was an hour, and talked alone to me; and,
among other things, tells me how the King will not yet be got to name
anybody in the room of Pen, but puts it off for three or four days; from
whence he do collect that they are brewing something for the Navy, but
what he knows not; but I perceive is vexed that things should go so, and
he hath reason; for he told me that it is likely they will do in this
as in other things--resolve first, and consider it and the fitness of it
afterward. Thence to White Hall, and met with Creed, and I took him to
the Harp and Balls, and there drank a cup of ale, he and I alone, and
discoursed of matters; and I perceive by him that he makes no doubt but
that all will turn to the old religion, for these people cannot hold
things in their hands, nor prevent its coming to that; and by his
discourse fits himself for it, and would have my Lord Sandwich do so,
too, and me. After a little talk with him, and particularly about the
ruinous condition of Tangier, which I have a great mind to lay before
the Duke of York, before it be too late, but dare not, because of his
great kindness to Lord Middleton, we parted, and I homeward; but
called at Povy’s, and there he stopped me to dinner, there being Mr.
Williamson, the Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Childe, and several others.
And after dinner, Povy and I together to talk of Tangier; and he would
have me move the Duke of York in it, for it concerns him particularly,
more than any, as being the head of us; and I do think to do it. Thence
home, and at the office busy all the afternoon, and so to supper and to
bed.