22nd. Up, and by water, with W. Newer, to White Hall, there to attend
the Lords of the Treasury; but, before they sat, I did make a step to
see Sir W. Coventry at his house, where, I bless God! he is come again;
but in my way I met him, and so he took me into his coach and carried
me to White Hall, and there set me down where he ought not--at least, he
hath not yet leave to come, nor hath thought fit to ask it, hearing that
Henry Saville is not only denied to kiss the King’s hand, but the King,
being asked it by the Duke of York, did deny it, and directed that
the Duke shall not receive him, to wait upon him in his chamber, till
further orders. Sir W. Coventry told me that he was going to visit Sir
John Trevor, who hath been kind to him; and he shewed me a long list
of all his friends that he must this week make visits to, that come to
visit him in the Tower; and seems mighty well satisfied with his being
out of business, but I hope he will not long be so; at least, I do
believe that all must go to rat if the King do not come to see the want
of such a servant. Thence to the Treasury-Chamber, and there all the
morning to my great grief, put to do Sir G. Downing’s work of dividing
the Customes for this year, between the Navy, the Ordnance and Tangier:
but it did so trouble my eyes, that I had rather have given L20 than
have had it to do; but I did thereby oblige Sir Thomas Clifford and Sir
J. Duncombe, and so am glad of the opportunity to recommend myself to
the former for the latter I need not, he loving me well already. At it
till noon, here being several of my brethren with me but doing nothing,
but I all. But this day I did also represent to our Treasurers, which
was read here, a state of the charge of the Navy, and what the expence
of it this year would likely be; which is done so as it will appear well
done and to my honour, for so the Lords did take it: and I oblige the
Treasurers by doing it, at their request. Thence with W. Hewer at noon
to Unthanke’s, where my wife stays for me and so to the Cocke, where
there was no room, and thence to King Street, to several cook’s shops,
where nothing to be had; and at last to the corner shop, going down Ivy
Lane, by my Lord of Salisbury’s, and there got a good dinner, my wife,
and W. Newer, and I: and after dinner she, with her coach, home; and
he and I to look over my papers for the East India Company, against
the afternoon: which done, I with them to White Hall, and there to the
Treasury-Chamber, where the East India Company and three Councillors
pleaded against me alone, for three or four hours, till seven at night,
before the Lords; and the Lords did give me the conquest on behalf of
the King, but could not come to any conclusion, the Company being stiff:
and so I think we shall go to law with them. This done, and my eyes
mighty bad with this day’s work, I to Mr. Wren’s, and then up to the
Duke of York, and there with Mr. Wren did propound to him my going to
Chatham to-morrow with Commissioner Middleton, and so this week to make
the pay there, and examine the business of “The Defyance” being lost,
and other businesses, which I did the rather, that I might be out of the
way at the wedding, and be at a little liberty myself for a day, or two,
to find a little pleasure, and give my eyes a little ease. The Duke
of York mightily satisfied with it; and so away home, where my wife
troubled at my being so late abroad, poor woman! though never more busy,
but I satisfied her; and so begun to put things in order for my journey
to-morrow, and so, after supper, to bed.