5th. Up, and by coach, it being very cold, to White Hall, expecting a
meeting of Tangier, but it did not. But, however, did wait there all
the morning, and, among other things, I spent a little time with Creed
walking in the garden, and talking about our Office, and Child’s coming
in to be a Commissioner; and, being his friend, I did think he might
do me a kindness to learn of him what the Duke of Buckingham and the
faction do design touching me, and to instil good words concerning me,
which he says, and I believe he will: and it is but necessary; for I
have not a mind indeed at this time to be put out of my Office, if I can
make any shift that is honourable to keep it; but I will not do it by
deserting the Duke of York. At noon by appointment comes Mr. Sheres,
and he and I to Unthanke’s, where my wife stays for us in our coach, and
Betty Turner with her; and we to the Mulberry Garden, where Sheres is to
treat us with a Spanish Olio,

     [An olio is a mixed dish of meat and vegetables, and, secondarily,
     mixture or medley.]

by a cook of his acquaintance that is there, that was with my Lord in
Spain: and without any other company, he did do it, and mighty nobly;
and the Olio was indeed a very noble dish, such as I never saw better,
or any more of. This, and the discourse he did give us of Spain, and
description of the Escuriall, was a fine treat. So we left other good
things, that would keep till night, for a collation; and, with much
content, took coach again, and went five or six miles towards Branford,
the Prince of Tuscany, who comes into England only to spend money and
see our country, comes into the town to-day, and is much expected; and
we met him, but the coach passing by apace, we could not see much of him
but he seems a very jolly and good comely man. By the way, we overtook
Captain Ferrers upon his fine Spanish horse, and he is a fine horse
indeed; but not so good, I think, as I have seen some. He did ride by
us most of the way, and with us to the Park, and there left us, where
we passed the evening, and meeting The. Turner, Talbot, W. Batelier,
and his sister, in a coach, we anon took them with us to the Mulberry
Garden; and there, after a walk, to supper upon what was left at noon;
and very good; only Mr. Sheres being taken suddenly ill for a while, did
spoil our mirth; but by and by was well again, and we mighty merry: and
so broke up, and left him at Charing Cross, and so calling only at my
cozen Turner’s, away home, mightily pleased with the day’s work, and
this day come another new mayd, for a middle mayd, but her name I know
not yet; and, for a cookmaid, we have, ever since Bridget went, used a
blackmoore of Mr. Batelier’s, Doll, who dresses our meat mighty well,
and we mightily pleased with her. So by and by to bed.