12th. Up, and my wife with me to White Hall, and Tom, and there she sets
us down, and there to wait on the Duke of York, with the rest of us, at
the Robes, where the Duke of York did tell us that the King would have
us prepare a draught of the present administration of the Navy, and
what it was in the late times, in order to his being able to distinguish
between the good and the bad, which I shall do, but to do it well will
give me a great deal of trouble. Here we shewed him Sir J. Minnes’s
propositions about balancing Storekeeper’s accounts; and I did shew him
Hosier’s, which did please him mightily, and he will have it shewed the
Council and King anon, to be put in practice. Thence to the Treasurer’s;
and I and Sir J. Minnes and Mr. Tippets down to the Lords Commissioners
of the Treasury, and there had a hot debate from Sir Thomas Clifford and
my Lord Ashly (the latter of which, I hear, is turning about as fast as
he can to the Duke of Buckingham’s side, being in danger, it seems, of
being otherwise out of play, which would not be convenient for him),
against Sir W. Coventry and Sir J. Duncomb, who did uphold our Office
against an accusation of our Treasurers, who told the Lords that they
found that we had run the King in debt L50,000 or more, more than the
money appointed for the year would defray, which they declared like
fools, and with design to hurt us, though the thing is in itself
ridiculous. But my Lord Ashly and Clifford did most horribly cry out
against the want of method in the Office. At last it come that it should
be put in writing what they had to object; but I was devilish mad at it,
to see us thus wounded by our own members, and so away vexed, and called
my wife, and to Hercules Pillars, Tom and I, there dined; and here there
coming a Frenchman by with his Shew, we did make him shew it us, which
he did just as Lacy acts it, which made it mighty pleasant to me. So
after dinner we away and to Dancre’s, and there saw our picture of
Greenwich in doing, which is mighty pretty, and so to White Hall, my
wife to Unthank’s, and I attended with Lord Brouncker the King and
Council, about the proposition of balancing Storekeeper’s accounts
and there presented Hosier’s book, and it was mighty well resented and
approved of. So the Council being up, we to the Queen’s side with the
King and Duke of York: and the Duke of York did take me out to talk
of our Treasurers, whom he is mighty angry with: and I perceive he
is mighty desirous to bring in as many good motions of profit and
reformation in the Navy as he can, before the Treasurers do light upon
them, they being desirous, it seems, to be thought the great reformers:
and the Duke of York do well. But to my great joy he is mighty open to
me in every thing; and by this means I know his whole mind, and shall be
able to secure myself, if he stands. Here to-night I understand, by
my Lord Brouncker, that at last it is concluded on by the King and
Buckingham that my Lord of Ormond shall not hold his government of
Ireland, which is a great stroke, to shew the power of Buckingham and
the poor spirit of the King, and little hold that any man can have of
him. Thence I homeward, and calling my wife called at my cozen Turner’s,
and there met our new cozen Pepys (Mrs. Dickenson), and Bab. and Betty’
come yesterday to town, poor girls, whom we have reason to love, and
mighty glad we are to see them; and there staid and talked a little,
being also mightily pleased to see Betty Turner, who is now in town,
and her brothers Charles and Will, being come from school to see their
father, and there talked a while, and so home, and there Pelling hath
got me W. Pen’s book against the Trinity.

     [Entitled, “The Sandy Foundation Shaken; or those...  doctrines
     of one God subsisting in three distinct and separate persons; the
     impossibility of God’s pardoning sinners without a plenary
     satisfaction, the justification of impure persons by an imputative
     righteousness, refuted from the authority of Scripture testimonies
     and right reason, etc.  London, 1668.”  It caused him to be
     imprisoned in the Tower.  “Aug. 4, 1669.  Young Penn who wrote the
     blasphemous book is delivered to his father to be transported”
      (“Letter to Sir John Birkenhead, quoted by Bishop Kennett in his MS.
     Collections, vol. lxxxix., p. 477).]

I got my wife to read it to me; and I find it so well writ as, I think,
it is too good for him ever to have writ it; and it is a serious sort of
book, and not fit for every body to read. So to supper and to bed.