10th. Up, and by hackney-coach to Auditor Beale’s Office, in Holborne,
to look for records of the Navy, but he was out of the way, and so
forced to go next to White Hall, to the Privy Seal; and, after staying
a little there, then to Westminster, where, at the Exchequer, I met with
Mr. Newport and Major Halsey; and, after doing a little business with
Mr. Burges, we by water to White Hall, where I made a little stop: and
so with them by coach to Temple Bar, where, at the Sugar Loaf we dined,
and W. Hewer with me; and there comes a companion of theirs, Colonel
Vernon, I think they called him; a merry good fellow, and one that was
very plain in cursing the Duke of Buckingham, and discoursing of his
designs to ruin us, and that ruin must follow his counsels, and that we
are an undone people. To which the others concurred, but not so plain,
but all vexed at Sir W. Coventry’s being laid aside: but Vernon, he is
concerned, I perceive, for my Lord Ormond’s being laid aside; but their
company, being all old cavaliers, were very pleasant to hear how they
swear and talk. But Halsey, to my content, tells me that my Lord Duke of
Albemarle says that W. Coventry being gone, nothing will be well done at
the Treasury, and I believe it; but they do all talk as that Duncombe,
upon some pretence or other, must follow him. Thence to Auditor Beale’s,
his house and office, but not to be found, and therefore to the Privy
Seale at White Hall, where, with W. Hewer and Mr. Gibson, who met me at
the Temple, I spent the afternoon till evening looking over the books
there, and did find several things to my purpose, though few of those I
designed to find, the books being kept there in no method at all. Having
done there, we by water home, and there find my cozen Turner and her two
daughters come to see us; and there, after talking a little, I had my
coach ready, and my wife and I, they going home, we out to White Chapel
to take a little ayre, though yet the dirtiness of the road do prevent
most of the pleasure, which should have been from this tour. So home,
and my wife to read to me till supper, and to bed.