17th. Up, and with W. Hewer with me to Lincoln’s Inn, by appointment,
to have spoke with Mr. Pedley about Mr. Goldsborough’s business and Mr.
Weaver’s, but he was gone out, and so I with Mr. Castle, the son-in-law
of Weaver, to White Hall to look for him, but did not find him, but
here I did meet with several and talked, and do hear only that the King
dining yesterday at the Dutch Embassador’s, after dinner they drank, and
were pretty merry; and, among the rest of the King’s company, there was
that worthy fellow my lord of Rochester, and Tom Killigrew, whose mirth
and raillery offended the former so much, that he did give Tom Killigrew
a box on the ear in the King’s presence, which do much give offence to
the people here at Court, to see how cheap the King makes himself,
and the more, for that the King hath not only passed by the thing, and
pardoned it to Rochester already, but this very morning the King did
publickly walk up and down, and Rochester I saw with him as free as
ever, to the King’s everlasting shame, to have so idle a rogue his
companion. How Tom Killigrew takes it, I do not hear. I do also this day
hear that my Lord Privy Seale do accept to go Lieutenant into
Ireland; but whether it be true or no, I cannot tell. So calling at my
shoemaker’s, and paying him to this day, I home to dinner, and in the
afternoon to Colonel Middleton’s house, to the burial of his wife, where
we are all invited, and much more company, and had each of us a ring:
and so towards evening to our church, where there was a sermon preached
by Mills, and so home. At church there was my Lord Brouncker and Mrs.
Williams in our pew, the first time they were ever there or that I knew
that either of them would go to church. At home comes Castle to me, to
desire me to go to Mr. Pedly, this night, he being to go out of town
to-morrow morning, which I, therefore, did, by hackney-coach, first
going to White Hall to meet with Sir W. Coventry, but missed him. But
here I had a pleasant rencontre of a lady in mourning, that, by the
little light I had, seemed handsome. I passing by her, I did observe she
looked back again and again upon me, I suffering her to go before, and
it being now duske. I observed she went into the little passage towards
the Privy Water-Gate, and I followed, but missed her; but coming back
again, I observed she returned, and went to go out of the Court. I
followed her, and took occasion, in the new passage now built, where the
walke is to be, to take her by the hand, to lead her through, which she
willingly accepted, and I led her to the Great Gate, and there left her,
she telling me, of her own accord, that she was going as far as, Charing
Cross; but my boy was at the gate, and so je durst not go out con her,
which vexed me, and my mind (God forgive me) did run apres her toute
that night, though I have reason to thank God, and so I do now, that I
was not tempted to go further. So to Lincoln’s Inn, where to Mr. Pedly,
with whom I spoke, and did my business presently: and I find him a man
of very good language, and mighty civil, and I believe very upright:
and so home, where W. Batelier was, and supped with us, and I did reckon
this night what I owed him; and I do find that the things my wife, of
her own head, hath taken (together with my own, which comes not to above
L5), comes to above L22. But it is the last, and so I am the better
contented; and they are things that are not trifles, but clothes,
gloves, shoes, hoods, &c. So after supper, to bed.