23rd. Up, and again to look after the setting things right against
dinner, which I did to very good content. So to the office, where all
the morning till noon, when word brought me to the Board that my Lord
Sandwich was come; so I presently rose, leaving the Board ready to
rise, and there I found my Lord Sandwich, Peterborough, and Sir Charles
Harbord; and presently after them comes my Lord Hinchingbroke, Mr.
Sidney, and Sir William Godolphin. And after greeting them, and some
time spent in talk, dinner was brought up, one dish after another, but
a dish at a time, but all so good; but, above all things, the variety of
wines, and excellent of their kind, I had for them, and all in so good
order, that they were mightily pleased, and myself full of content at
it: and indeed it was, of a dinner of about six or eight dishes, as
noble as any man need to have, I think; at least, all was done in the
noblest manner that ever I had any, and I have rarely seen in my life
better anywhere else, even at the Court. After dinner, my Lords to
cards, and the rest of us sitting about them and talking, and looking
on my books and pictures, and my wife’s drawings, which they commend
mightily; and mighty merry all day long, with exceeding great content,
and so till seven at night; and so took their leaves, it being dark and
foul weather. Thus was this entertainment over, the best of its kind,
and the fullest of honour and content to me, that ever I had in my life:
and shall not easily have so good again. The truth is, I have some fear
that I am more behind-hand in the world for these last two years, since
I have not, or for some time could not, look after my accounts, which do
a little allay my pleasure. But I do trust in God I am pretty well yet,
and resolve, in a very little time, to look into my accounts, and see
how they stand. So to my wife’s chamber, and there supped, and got her
cut my hair and look my shirt, for I have itched mightily these 6 or 7
days, and when all comes to all she finds that I am lousy, having found
in my head and body about twenty lice, little and great, which I wonder
at, being more than I have had I believe these 20 years. I did think
I might have got them from the little boy, but they did presently look
him, and found none. So how they come I know not, but presently did
shift myself, and so shall be rid of them, and cut my hair close to my
head, and so with much content to bed.