29th. Up, and by water to White Hall; and there to the Duke of York,
to shew myself, after my journey to Chatham, but did no business to-day
with him: only after gone from him, I to Sir T. Clifford’s; and there,
after an hour’s waiting, he being alone in his closet, I did speak with
him, and give him the account he gave me to draw up, and he did like it
very well: and then fell to talk of the business of the Navy and giving
me good words, did fall foul of the constitution [of the Board], and did
then discover his thoughts, that Sir J. Minnes was too old, and so was
Colonel Middleton, and that my Lord Brouncker did mind his mathematics
too much. I did not give much encouragement to that of finding fault
with my fellow-officers; but did stand up for the constitution, and
did say that what faults there were in our Office would be found not to
arise from the constitution, but from the failures of the officers in
whose hands it was. This he did seem to give good ear to; but did give
me of myself very good words, which pleased me well, though I shall not
build upon them any thing. Thence home; and after dinner by water with
Tom down to Greenwich, he reading to me all the way, coming and going,
my collections out of the Duke of York’s old manuscript of the Navy,
which I have bound up, and do please me mightily. At Greenwich I come to
Captain Cocke’s, where the house full of company, at the burial of James
Temple, who, it seems, hath been dead these five days here I had a very
good ring, which I did give my wife as soon as I come home. I spent my
time there walking in the garden, talking with James Pierce, who tells
me that he is certain that the Duke of Buckingham had been with his
wenches all the time that he was absent, which was all the last week,
nobody knowing where he was. The great talk is of the King’s being
hot of late against Conventicles, and to see whether the Duke of
Buckingham’s being returned will turn the King, which will make him very
popular: and some think it is his plot to make the King thus, to shew
his power in the making him change his mind. But Pierce did tell me that
the King did certainly say, that he that took one stone from the Church,
did take two from his Crown. By and by the corpse come out; and I, with
Sir Richard Browne and Mr. Evelyn, in their coach to the church, where
Mr. Plume preached. But I, in the midst of the sermon, did go out, and
walked all alone, round to Deptford, thinking para have seen the wife of
Bagwell, which I did at her door, but I could not conveniently go into
her house, and so lost my labour: and so to the King’s Yard, and there
my boat by order met me; and home, where I made my boy to finish the my
manuscript, and so to supper and to bed my new chamber-maid, that comes
in the room of Jane; is come, Jane and Tom lying at their own lodging
this night: the new maid’s name is Matt, a proper and very comely
maid... This day also our cook-maid Bridget went away, which I was sorry
for; but, just at her going she was found to be a thief, and so I was
the less trouble for it; but now our whole house will, in a manner, be
new which, since Jane is gone, I am not at all sorry for, for that my
late differences with my wife about poor Deb. will not be remembered. So
to bed after supper, and to sleep with great content.