13th. Up, and at the Office a good while, and then, my wife going down
the River to spend the day with her mother at Deptford, I abroad, and
first to the milliner’s in Fenchurch Street, over against Rawlinson’s,
and there, meeting both him and her in the shop, I bought a pair of
gloves, and fell to talk, and found so much freedom that I stayed there
the best part of the morning till towards noon, with great pleasure, it
being a holiday, and then against my will away and to the ‘Change, where
I left W. Hewer, and I by hackney-coach to the Spittle, and heard a
piece of a dull sermon to my Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and thence saw
them all take horse and ride away, which I have not seen together many
a-day; their wives also went in their coaches; and, indeed, the sight
was mighty pleasing. Thence took occasion to go back to this milliner’s
[in Fenchurch Street], whose name I now understand to be Clerke; and
there, her husband inviting me up to the balcony, to see the sight go by
to dine at Clothworker’s-Hall, I did go up and there saw it go by: and
then; there being a good piece of cold roast beef upon the tables and
one Margetts, a young merchant that lodges there, and is likely to marry
a sister of hers, I staid and eat, and had much good conversation with
her, who hath the vanity to talk of her great friends and father, one
Wingate, near Welling;, that hath been a Parliament-man. Here also was
Stapely: the rope-merchant, and dined with us; and, after spending most
of the afternoon also, I away home, and there sent for W. Hewer, and he
and I by water to White Hall to loop among other things, for Mr. May,
to unbespeak his dining with me to-morrow. But here being in the
court-yard, God would have it, I spied Deb., which made my heart and
head to work, and I presently could not refrain, but sent W. Hewer away
to look for Mr. Wren (W. Hewer, I perceive, did see her, but whether
he did see me see her I know not, or suspect my sending him away I know
not, but my heart could not hinder me), and I run after her and two
women and a man, more ordinary people, and she in her old clothes,
and after hunting a little, find them in the lobby of the chapel below
stairs, and there I observed she endeavoured to avoid me, but I did
speak to her and she to me, and did get her pour dire me ou she demeurs
now, and did charge her para say nothing of me that I had vu elle, which
she did promise, and so with my heart full of surprize and disorder I
away, and meeting with Sir H. Cholmley walked into the Park with him and
back again, looking to see if I could spy her again in the Park, but I
could not. And so back to White Hall, and then back to the Park with Mr.
May, but could see her, no more, and so with W. Hewer, who I doubt by my
countenance might see some disorder in me, we home by water, and there
I find Talbot Pepys, and Mrs. Turner, and Betty, come to invite us to
dinner on Thursday; and, after drinking, I saw them to the water-side,
and so back home through Crutched Friars, and there saw Mary Mercer,
and put off my hat to her, on the other side of the way, but it being a
little darkish she did not, I think, know me well, and so to my office
to put my papers in order, they having been removed for my closet to be
made clean, and so home to my wife, who is come home from Deptford. But,
God forgive me, I hardly know how to put on confidence enough to speak
as innocent, having had this passage to-day with Deb., though only, God
knows, by accident. But my great pain is lest God Almighty shall suffer
me to find out this girl, whom indeed I love, and with a bad amour, but
I will pray to God to give me grace to forbear it. So home to supper,
where very sparing in my discourse, not giving occasion of any enquiry
where I have been to-day, or what I have done, and so without any
trouble to-night more than my fear, we to bed.