4th. Lay long, talking with my wife, and did of my own accord come to an
allowance of her of L30 a-year for all expences, clothes and everything,
which she was mightily pleased with, it being more than ever she asked
or expected, and so rose, with much content, and up with W. Hewer to
White Hall, there to speak with Mr. Wren, which I did about several
things of the office entered in my memorandum books, and so about noon,
going homeward with W. Hewer, he and I went in and saw the great tall
woman that is to be seen, who is but twenty-one years old, and I do
easily stand under her arms. Then, going further, The. Turner called me,
out of her coach where her mother, &c., was, and invited me by all means
to dine with them, at my cozen Roger’s mistress’s, the widow Dickenson!
So, I went to them afterwards, and dined with them, and mighty
handsomely treated, and she a wonderful merry, good-humoured, fat, but
plain woman, but I believe a very good woman, and mighty civil to me.
Mrs. Turner, the mother, and Mrs. Dyke, and The., and Betty was the
company, and a gentleman of their acquaintance. Betty I did long to see,
and she is indifferent pretty, but not what the world did speak of her;
but I am mighty glad to have one so pretty of our kindred. After dinner,
I walked with them, to shew them the great woman, which they admire,
as well they may; and so back with them, and left them; and I to White
Hall, where a Committee of Tangier met, but little to do there, but I
did receive an instance of the Duke of York’s kindness to me, and the
whole Committee, that they would not order any thing about the Treasurer
for the Corporation now in establishing, without my assent, and
considering whether it would be to my wrong or no. Thence up and down
the house, and to the Duke of York’s side, and there in the Duchess’s
presence; and was mightily complimented by my Lady Peterborough, in my
Lord Sandwich’s presence, whom she engaged to thank me for my kindness
to her and her Lord.... By and by I met my Lord Brouncker; and he and
I to the Duke of York alone, and discoursed over the carriage of the
present Treasurers, in opposition to, or at least independency of, the
Duke of York, or our Board, which the Duke of York is sensible of, and
all remember, I believe; for they do carry themselves very respectlessly
of him and us. We also declared our minds together to the Duke of York
about Sir John Minnes’s incapacity to do any service in the Office,
and that it is but to betray the King to have any business of trust
committed to his weakness. So the Duke of York was very sensible of it
and promised to speak to the King about it. That done, I with W. Hewer
took up my wife at Unthank’s, and so home, and there with pleasure to
read and talk, and so to supper, and put into writing, in merry terms,
our agreement between my wife and me, about L30 a-year, and so to bed.
This was done under both our hands merrily, and put into W. Hewer’s to
keep.