7th. Up, and by coach to my cozen Turner’s, and invited them to dine
at the Cocke to-day, with my wife and me; and so to the Lords of the
Treasury, where all the morning, and settled matters to their liking
about the assignments on the Customes, between the Navy Office and
Victualler, and to that end spent most of the morning there with D.
Gawden, and thence took him to the Cocke, and there left him and my
clerk Gibson together evening their reckonings, while I to the New
Exchange to talk with Betty, my little sempstress; and so to Mrs.
Turner’s, to call them to dinner, but my wife not come, I back again,
and was overtaken by a porter, with a message from my wife that she was
ill, and could not come to us: so I back again to Mrs. Turner’s, and
find them gone; and so back again to the Cocke, and there find Mr.
Turner, Betty, and Talbot Pepys, and they dined with myself Sir D.
Gawden and Gibson, and mighty merry, this house being famous for good
meat, and particularly pease-porridge and after dinner broke up, and
they away; and I to the Council-Chamber, and there heard the great
complaint of the City, tried against the gentlemen of the Temple, for
the late riot, as they would have it, when my Lord Mayor was there.
But, upon hearing the whole business, the City was certainly to blame to
charge them in this manner as with a riot: but the King and Council did
forbear to determine any thing it, till the other business of the title
and privilege be decided which is now under dispute at law between them,
whether Temple be within the liberty of the City or no. But I, sorry to
see the City so ill advised as to complain in a thing where their proofs
were so weak. Thence to my cousin Turner’s, and thence with her and
her daughters, and her sister Turner, I carrying Betty in my lap, to
Talbot’s chamber at the Temple, where, by agreement, the poor rogue had
a pretty dish of anchovies and sweetmeats for them; and hither come Mr.
Eden, who was in his mistress’s disfavour ever since the other night
that he come in thither fuddled, when we were there. But I did make them
friends by my buffoonery, and bringing up a way of spelling their names,
and making Theophila spell Lamton, which The. would have to be the name
of Mr. Eden’s mistress, and mighty merry we were till late, and then
I by coach home, and so to bed, my wife being ill of those, but well
enough pleased with my being with them. This day I do hear that Betty
Turner is to be left at school at Hackney, which I am mightily pleased
with; for then I shall, now and then, see her. She is pretty, and a girl
for that, and her relations, I love.