7th (Lord’s day). Up, and to the office, busy till church time, and then
to church, where a dull sermon, and so home to dinner, all alone with my
wife, and then to even my Journall to this day, and then to the Tower,
to see Sir W. Coventry, who had H. Jermin and a great many more with
him, and more, while I was there, come in; so that I do hear that there
was not less than sixty coaches there yesterday, and the other day;
which I hear also that there is a great exception taken at, by the King
and the Duke of Buckingham, but it cannot be helped. Thence home, and
with our coach out to Suffolk Street, to see my cozen Pepys, but neither
the old nor young at home. So to my cozen Turner’s, and there staid
talking a little, and then back to Suffolk Street, where they not being
yet come home I to White Hall, and there hear that there are letters
come from Sir Thomas Allen, that he hath made some kind of peace with
Algiers; upon which the King and Duke of York, being to go out of town
to-morrow, are met at my Lord Arlington’s: so I there, and by Mr. Wren
was desired to stay to see if there were occasion for their speaking
with me, which I did, walking without, with Charles Porter,

     [Charles Porter “was the son of a prebend[ary] in Norwich, and a
     ‘prentice boy in the city in the rebellious times.  When the
     committee house was blown up, he was very active in that rising, and
     after the soldiers came and dispersed the rout, he, as a rat among
     joint stools, shifted to and fro among the shambles, and had forty
     pistols shot at him by the troopers that rode after him to kill him
     [24th April, 1648].  In that distress he had the presence of mind to
     catch up a little child that, during the rout, was frighted, and
     stood crying in the streets, and, unobserved by the troopers, ran
     away with it.  The people opened a way for him, saying, ‘Make room
     for the poor child.’ Thus he got off, and while search was made for
     him in the market-place, got into the Yarmouth ferry, and at
     Yarmouth took ship and went to Holland....  In Holland he
     trailed a pike, and was in several actions as a common soldier.  At
     length he kept a cavalier eating-house; but, his customers being
     needy, he soon broke, and came for England, and being a genteel
     youth, was taken in among the chancery clerks, and got to be under a
     master....  His industry was great; and he had an acquired
     dexterity and skill in the forms of the court; and although he was a
     bon companion, and followed much the bottle, yet he made such
     dispatches as satisfied his clients, especially the clerks, who knew
     where to find him.  His person was florid, and speech prompt and
     articulate.  But his vices, in the way of women and the bottle, were
     so ungoverned, as brought him to a morsel....  When the Lord
     Keeper North had the Seal, who from an early acquaintance had a
     kindness for him which was well known, and also that he was well
     heard, as they call it, business flowed in to him very fast, and yet
     he could scarce keep himself at liberty to follow his business....
     At the Revolution, when his interest fell from, and his debts began
     to fall upon him, he was at his wits’ end....  His character for
     fidelity, loyalty, and facetious conversation was without
     exception”--Roger North’s Lives of the Norths (Lord Keeper
     Guilford), ed.  Jessopp, vol. i., pp. 381-2.  He was originally made
     Lord Chancellor of Ireland in the reign of James II., during the
     viceroyalty of Lord Clarendon, 1686, when he was knighted.  “He
     was,” says Burnet, “a man of ready wit, and being poor was thought a
     person fit to be made a tool of.  When Clarendon was recalled,
     Porter was also displaced, and Fitton was made chancellor, a man who
     knew no other law than the king’s pleasure” (“Own Time”).  Sir
     Charles Porter was again made Lord Chancellor of Ireland in 1690,
     and in this same year he acted as one of the Lords Justices.  This
     note of Lord Braybrooke’s is retained and added to, but the
     reference may after all be to another Charles Porter.  See vol.
     iii., p. 122, and vol. vi., p. 98.]

talking of a great many things: and I perceive all the world is against
the Duke of Buckingham his acting thus high, and do prophesy nothing
but ruin from it: But he do well observe that the church lands cannot
certainly come to much, if the King shall [be] persuaded to take them;
they being leased out for long leases. By and by, after two hours’ stay,
they rose, having, as Wren tells me, resolved upon sending six ships
to the Streights forthwith, not being contented with the peace upon the
terms they demand, which are, that all our ships, where any Turks or
Moores shall be found slaves, shall be prizes; which will imply that
they, must be searched. I hear that to-morrow the King and the Duke of
York set out for Newmarket, by three in the morning; to some foot and
horse-races, to be abroad ten or twelve days: So I away, without seeing
the Duke of York; but Mr. Wren showed me the Order of Council about the
balancing the Storekeeper’s accounts, passed the Council in the very
terms I drew it, only I did put in my name as he that presented the book
of Hosier’s preparing, and that is left out--I mean, my name--which is
no great matter. So to my wife to Suffolk Streete, where she was gone,
and there I found them at supper, and eat a little with them, and so
home, and there to bed, my cold pretty well gone.