12th. Up, and to the Office, where, by occasion of a message from the
Treasurers that their Board found fault with Commissioner Middleton,
I went up from our Board to the Lords of the Treasury to meet our
Treasurers, and did, and there did dispute the business, it being about
the matter of paying a little money to Chatham Yard, wherein I find the
Treasurers mighty supple, and I believe we shall bring them to reason,
though they begun mighty upon us, as if we had no power of directing
them, but they, us. Thence back presently home, to dinner, where I
discern my wife to have been in pain about where I have been, but said
nothing to me, but I believe did send W. Hewer to seek me, but I take no
notice of it, but am vexed. So to dinner with my people, and then to the
Office, where all the afternoon, and did much business, and at it late,
and so home to supper, and to bed. This day, meeting Mr. Pierce at White
Hall, he tells me that his boy hath a great mind to see me, and is going
to school again; and Dr. Clerke, being by, do tell me that he is a fine
boy; but I durst not answer anything, because I durst not invite him to
my house, for fear of my wife; and therefore, to my great trouble, was
forced to neglect that discourse. But here Mr. Pierce, I asking him
whither he was going, told me as a great secret that he was going to his
master’s mistress, Mrs. Churchill, with some physic; meaning for the pox
I suppose, or else that she is got with child. This evening I observed
my wife mighty dull, and I myself was not mighty fond, because of some
hard words she did give me at noon, out of a jealousy at my being abroad
this morning, which, God knows, it was upon the business of the Office
unexpectedly: but I to bed, not thinking but she would come after
me. But waking by and by out of a slumber, which I usually fall into
presently after my coming into the bed, I found she did not prepare to
come to bed, but got fresh candles, and more wood for her fire, it being
mighty cold, too. At this being troubled, I after a while prayed her to
come to bed, all my people being gone to bed; so, after an hour or two,
she silent, and I now and then praying her to come to bed, she fell
out into a fury, that I was a rogue, and false to her. But yet I did
perceive that she was to seek what to say, only she invented, I believe,
a business that I was seen in a hackney coach with the glasses up with
Deb., but could not tell the time, nor was sure I was he. I did, as
I might truly, deny it, and was mightily troubled, but all would not
serve. At last, about one o’clock, she come to my side of the bed, and
drew my curtaine open, and with the tongs red hot at the ends, made as
if she did design to pinch me with them, at which, in dismay, I rose up,
and with a few words she laid them down; and did by little and, little,
very sillily, let all the discourse fall; and about two, but with much
seeming difficulty, come to bed, and there lay well all night, and long
in bed talking together, with much pleasure, it being, I know, nothing
but her doubt of my going out yesterday, without telling her of my
going, which did vex her, poor wretch! last night, and I cannot blame
her jealousy, though it do vex me to the heart.