23rd. Going to rise, without saying anything, my wife stopped me; and,
after a little angry talk, did tell me how she spent all day yesterday
with M. Batelier and her sweetheart, and seeing a play at the New
Nursery, which is set up at the house in Lincoln’s Inn Fields, which
was formerly the King’s house. So that I was mightily pleased again, and
rose a with great content; and so by water to White Hall, and there to
the Council-Chamber, and heard two or three causes: among others, that
of the complaint of Sir Philip Howard and Watson, the inventors, as
they pretend, of the business of varnishing and lackerworke, against the
Company of Painters, who take upon them to do the same thing; where I
saw a great instance of the weakness of a young Counsel not used to such
an audience, against the Solicitor-General and two more able Counsel
used to it. Though he had the right of, his side, and did prevail for
what he pretended to against the rest, yet it was with much disadvantage
and hazard. Here, also I heard Mr. Papillion’ make his defence to the
King, against some complaints of the Farmers of Excise; but it was so
weak, and done only by his own seeking, that it was to his injury more
than profit, and made his case the worse, being ill managed, and in
a cause against the King. Thence at noon, the Council rising, I to
Unthanke’s, and there by agreement met my wife, and with her to the
Cocke, and did give her a dinner, but yet both of us but in an ill
humour, whatever was the matter with her, but thence to the King’s
playhouse, and saw “The Generous Portugalls,” a play that pleases me
better and better every time we see it; and, I thank God! it did not
trouble my eyes so much as I was afeard it would. Here, by accident, we
met Mr. Sheres, and yet I could not but be troubled, because my wife
do so delight to talk of him, and to see him. Nevertheless, we took him
with us to our mercer’s, and to the Exchange, and he helped me to choose
a summer-suit of coloured camelott, coat and breeches, and a flowered
tabby vest very rich; and so home, where he took his leave, and down to
Greenwich, where he hath some friends; and I to see Colonel Middleton,
who hath been ill for a day or two, or three; and so home to supper, and
to bed.