30th. Up, and by coach to the coachmaker’s: and there I do find a
great many ladies sitting in the body of a coach that must be ended
by to-morrow: they were my Lady Marquess of Winchester, Bellassis, and
other great ladies; eating of bread and butter, and drinking ale. I to
my coach, which is silvered over, but no varnish yet laid on, so I put
it in a way of doing; and myself about other business, and particularly
to see Sir W. Coventry, with whom I talked a good while to my great
content; and so to other places-among others, to my tailor’s: and then
to the belt-maker’s, where my belt cost me 55s., of the colour of my new
suit; and here, understanding that the mistress of the house, an oldish
woman in a hat hath some water good for the eyes, she did dress me,
making my eyes smart most horribly, and did give me a little glass of
it, which I will use, and hope it will do me good. So to the cutler’s,
and there did give Tom, who was with me all day a sword cost me 12s. and
a belt of my owne; and set my own silver-hilt sword a-gilding against
to-morrow. This morning I did visit Mr. Oldenburgh, and did see the
instrument for perspective made by Dr. Wren, of which I have one making
by Browne; and the sight of this do please me mightily. At noon my wife
come to me at my tailor’s, and I sent her home and myself and Tom dined
at Hercules’ Pillars; and so about our business again, and particularly
to Lilly’s, the varnisher about my prints, whereof some of them
are pasted upon the boards, and to my full content. Thence to the
frame-maker’s one Morris, in Long Acre, who shewed me several forms of
frames to choose by, which was pretty, in little bits of mouldings,
to choose by. This done, I to my coach-maker’s, and there vexed to see
nothing yet done to my coach, at three in the afternoon; but I set it in
doing, and stood by it till eight at night, and saw the painter varnish
which is pretty to see how every doing it over do make it more and more
yellow; and it dries as fast in the sun as it can be laid on almost; and
most coaches are, now-a-days done so, and it is very pretty when laid
on well, and not pale, as some are, even to shew the silver. Here I did
make the workmen drink, and saw my coach cleaned and oyled; and, staying
among poor people there in the alley, did hear them call their fat child
Punch, which pleased me mightily that word being become a word of common
use for all that is thick and short. At night home, and there find my
wife hath been making herself clean against to-morrow; and, late as it
was, I did send my coachman and horses to fetch home the coach to-night,
and so we to supper, myself most weary with walking and standing so
much, to see all things fine against to-morrow, and so to bed. God give
a blessing to it! Meeting with Mr. Sheres, he went with me up and down
to several places, and, among others, to buy a perriwig, but I bought
none; and also to Dancre’s, where he was about my picture of Windsor,
which is mighty pretty, and so will the prospect of Rome be.