18th. Up by candlelight, and with W. Hewer walked to the Temple, and
thence took coach and to Sir William Coventry’s, and there discoursed
the business of my Treasurer’s place, at Tangier, wherein he consents
to my desire, and concurs therein, which I am glad of, that I may not
be accountable for a man so far off. And so I to my Lord Sandwich’s, and
there walk with him through the garden, to White Hall, where he tells me
what he had done about this Treasurer’s place, and I perceive the whole
thing did proceed from him: that finding it would be best to have the
Governor have nothing to do with the pay of the garrison, he did propose
to the Duke of York alone that a pay-master should be there; and that
being desirous to do a courtesy to Sir Charles Harbord, and to prevent
the Duke of York’s looking out for any body else, he did name him to the
Duke of York. That when he come the other day to move this to the Board
of Tangier, the Duke of York, it seems, did readily reply, that it was
fit to have Mr. Pepys satisfied therein first, and that it was not good
to make places for persons. This my Lord in great confidence tells me,
that he do take very ill from the Duke of York, though nobody knew the
meaning of these words but him; and that he did take no notice of them,
but bit his lip, being satisfied that the Duke of York’s care of me was
as desirable to him, as it could be to have Sir Charles Harbord: and did
seem industrious to let me see that he was glad that the Duke of York
and he might come to contend who shall be the kindest to me, which I
owned as his great love, and so I hope and believe it is, though my Lord
did go a little too far in this business, to move it so far, without
consulting me. But I took no notice of that, but was glad to see this
competition come about, that my Lord Sandwich is apparently jealous of
my thinking that the Duke of York do mean me more kindness than him. So
we walked together, and I took this occasion to invite him to dinner one
day to my house, and he readily appointed Friday next, which I shall be
glad to have over to his content, he having never yet eat a bit of
my bread. Thence to the Duke of York on the King’s side, with our
Treasurers of the Navy, to discourse some business of the Navy, about
the pay of the yards, and there I was taken notice of, many Lords being
there in the room, of the Duke of York’s conference with me; and so
away, and meeting Mr. Sidney Montagu and Sheres, a small invitation
served their turn to carry them to London, where I paid Sheres his L100,
given him for his pains in drawing the plate of Tangier fortifications,
&c., and so home to my house to dinner, where I had a pretty handsome
sudden dinner, and all well pleased; and thence we three and my wife
to the Duke of York’s playhouse, and there saw “The Witts,” a medley of
things, but some similes mighty good, though ill mixed; and thence with
my wife to the Exchange and bought some things, and so home, after I had
been at White Hall, and there in the Queen’s withdrawing-room invited
my Lord Peterborough to dine with me, with my Lord Sandwich, who readily
accepted it. Thence back and took up my wife at the ‘Change, and so
home. This day at noon I went with my young gentlemen (thereby to get a
little time while W. Hewer went home to bid them get a dinner ready)
to the Pope’s Head tavern, there to see the fine painted room which
Rogerson told me of, of his doing; but I do not like it at all, though
it be good for such a publick room.