February 1st. Up, and by water from the Tower to White Hall, the first
time that I have gone to that end of the town by water, for two or three
months, I think, since I kept a coach, which God send propitious to me;
but it is a very great convenience. I went to a Committee of Tangier,
but it did not meet, and so I meeting Mr. Povy, he and I away to
Dancre’s, to speak something touching the pictures I am getting him
to make for me. And thence he carried me to Mr. Streeter’s, the famous
history-painter over the way, whom I have often heard of, but did
never see him before; and there I found him, and Dr. Wren, and several
Virtuosos, looking upon the paintings which he is making for the new
Theatre at Oxford: and, indeed, they look as if they would be very fine,
and the rest think better than those of Rubens in the Banqueting-house
at White Hall, but I do not so fully think so. But they will certainly
be very noble; and I am mightily pleased to have the fortune to see this
man and his work, which is very famous; and he a very civil little man,
and lame, but lives very handsomely. So thence to my Lord Bellassis,
and met him within: my business only to see a chimney-piece of Dancre’s
doing, in distemper, with egg to keep off the glaring of the light,
which I must have done for my room: and indeed it is pretty, but, I
must confess, I do think it is not altogether so beautiful as the oyle
pictures; but I will have some of one, and some of another. Thence set
him down at Little Turnstile, and so I home, and there eat a little
dinner, and away with my wife by coach to the King’s playhouse, thinking
to have seen “The Heyresse,” first acted on Saturday last; but when
we come thither, we find no play there; Kinaston, that did act a part
therein, in abuse to Sir Charles Sedley, being last night exceedingly
beaten with sticks, by two or three that assaulted him, so as he is
mightily bruised, and forced to keep his bed. So we to the Duke of
York’s playhouse, and there saw “She Would if She Could,” and so home
and to my office to business, and then to supper and to bed. This day,
going to the play, The. Turner met us, and carried us to her mother, at
my Lady Mordaunt’s; and I did carry both mother and daughter with us to
the Duke of York’s playhouse, at next door.