15th. Up, and by coach to Sir W. Coventry, where with him a good while
in his chamber, talking of one thing or another; among others, he
told me of the great factions at Court at this day, even to the sober
engaging of great persons, and differences, and making the King cheap
and ridiculous. It is about my Lady Harvy’s being offended at Doll
Common’s acting of Sempronia, to imitate her; for which she got my Lord
Chamberlain, her kinsman, to imprison Doll: when my Lady Castlemayne
made the King to release her, and to order her to act it again, worse
than ever, the other day, where the King himself was: and since it was
acted again, and my Lady Harvy provided people to hiss her and fling
oranges at her: but, it seems the heat is come to a great height, and
real troubles at Court about it. Thence he and I out of doors, but he
to Sir J. Duncomb, and I to White Hall through the Park, where I met
the King and the Duke of York, and so walked with them, and so to White
Hall, where the Duke of York met the office and did a little business;
and I did give him thanks for his favour to me yesterday, at the
Committee of Tangier, in my absence, Mr. Povy having given me advice
of it, of the discourse there of doing something as to the putting the
payment of the garrison into some undertaker’s hand, Alderman Backewell,
which the Duke of York would not suffer to go on, without my presence at
the debate. And he answered me just thus: that he ought to have a care
of him that do the King’s business in the manner that I do, and words
of more force than that. Then down with Lord Brouncker to Sir R. Murray,
into the King’s little elaboratory, under his closet, a pretty place;
and there saw a great many chymical glasses and things, but understood
none of them. So I home and to dinner, and then out again and stop with
my wife at my cozen Turner’s where I staid and sat a while, and carried
The. and my wife to the Duke of York’s house, to “Macbeth,” and myself
to White Hall, to the Lords of the Treasury, about Tangier business; and
there was by at much merry discourse between them and my Lord Anglesey,
who made sport of our new Treasurers, and called them his deputys, and
much of that kind. And having done my own business, I away back, and
carried my cozen Turner and sister Dyke to a friend’s house, where they
were to sup, in Lincoln’s Inn Fields; and I to the Duke of York’s house
and saw the last two acts, and so carried The. thither, and so home with
my wife, who read to me late, and so to supper and to bed. This day The.
Turner shewed me at the play my Lady Portman, who has grown out of my
knowledge.