8th. Up, and dressed myself; and by coach, with W. Hewer and my wife, to
White Hall, where she set us two down; and in the way, our little boy,
at Martin, my bookseller’s shop, going to ‘light, did fall down; and,
had he not been a most nimble boy (I saw how he did it, and was mightily
pleased with him for it), he had been run over by the coach. I to visit
my Lord Sandwich; and there, while my Lord was dressing himself, did see
a young Spaniard, that he hath brought over with him, dance, which he is
admired for, as the best dancer in Spain, and indeed he do with mighty
mastery; but I do not like his dancing as the English, though my Lord
commends it mightily: but I will have him to my house, and show it my
wife. Here I met with Mr. Moore, who tells me the state of my Lord’s
accounts of his embassy, which I find not so good as I thought: for,
though it be passed the King and his Cabal (the Committee for Foreign
Affairs as they are called), yet they have cut off from L9000 full
L8000, and have now sent it to the Lords of the Treasury, who, though
the Committee have allowed the rest, yet they are not obliged to
abide by it. So that I do fear this account may yet be long ere it be
passed--much more, ere that sum be paid: I am sorry for the family,
and not a little for what it owes me. So to my wife, took her up at
Unthank’s, and in our way home did shew her the tall woman in Holborne,
which I have seen before; and I measured her, and she is, without shoes,
just six feet five inches high, and they say not above twenty-one years
old. Thence home, and there to dinner, and my wife in a wonderful ill
humour; and, after dinner, I staid with her alone, being not able to
endure this life, and fell to some angry words together; but by and by
were mighty good friends, she telling me plain it was still about Jane,
whom she cannot believe but I am base with, which I made a matter of
mirth at; but at last did call up Jane, and confirm her mistress’s
directions for her being gone at Easter, which I find the wench willing
to be, but directly prayed that Tom might go with her, which I promised,
and was but what I designed; and she being thus spoke with, and gone, my
wife and I good friends, and mighty kind, I having promised, and I
will perform it, never to give her for the time to come ground of new
trouble; and so I to the Office, with a very light heart, and there
close at my business all the afternoon. This day I was told by Mr. Wren,
that Captain Cox, Master-Attendant at Deptford, is to be one of us
very soon, he and Tippets being to take their turns for Chatham and
Portsmouth, which choice I like well enough; and Captain Annesley is to
come in his room at Deptford. This morning also, going to visit Roger
Pepys, at the potticary’s in King’s Street, he tells me that Roger is
gone to his wife’s, so that they have been married, as he tells me, ever
since the middle of last week: it was his design, upon good reasons,
to make no noise of it; but I am well enough contented that it is over.
Dispatched a great deal of business at the office, and there pretty
late, till finding myself very full of wind, by my eating no dinner
to-day, being vexed, I was forced to go home, and there supped W.
Batelier with us, and so with great content to bed.