15th. Up, and to the office, and thence before the office sat to the
Excise Office with W. Hewer, but found some occasion to go another way
to the Temple upon business, and I by Deb.’s direction did know whither
in Jewen Street to direct my hackney coachman, while I staid in the
coach in Aldgate Street, to go thither just to enquire whether Mrs.
Hunt, her aunt, was in town, who brought me word she was not; thought
this was as much as I could do at once, and therefore went away troubled
through that I could do no more but to the office I must go and did, and
there all the morning, but coming thither I find Bagwell’s wife, who did
give me a little note into my hand, wherein I find her para invite me
para meet her in Moorfields this noon, where I might speak with her, and
so after the office was up, my wife being gone before by invitation to
my cozen Turner’s to dine, I to the place, and there, after walking
up and down by the windmills, I did find her and talk with her, but it
being holiday and the place full of people, we parted, leaving further
discourse and doing to another time. Thence I away, and through Jewen
Street, my mind, God knows, running that way, but stopped not, but going
down Holborne hill, by the Conduit, I did see Deb. on foot going up the
hill. I saw her, and she me, but she made no stop, but seemed unwilling
to speak to me; so I away on, but then stopped and ‘light, and after her
and overtook her at the end of Hosier lane in Smithfield, and without
standing in the street desired her to follow me, and I led her into a
little blind alehouse within the walls, and there she and I alone fell
to talk and baiser la and toker su mammailles, but she mighty coy, and
I hope modest.... I did give her in a paper 20s., and we did agree para
meet again in the Hall at Westminster on Monday next; and so giving me
great hopes by her carriage that she continues modest and honest, we did
there part, she going home and I to Mrs. Turner’s, but when I come back
to the place where I left my coach it was gone, I having staid too long,
which did trouble me to abuse the poor fellow, so that taking another
coach I did direct him to find out the fellow and send him to me. At my
cozen Turner’s I find they are gone all to dinner to Povy’s, and thither
I, and there they were all, and W. Batelier and his sister, and had
dined; but I had good things brought me, and then all up and down the
house, and mightily pleased to see the fine rooms: but, the truth is,
there are so many bad pictures, that to me make the good ones lose much
of the pleasure in seeing them. The. and Betty Turner in new flowered
tabby gowns, and so we were pretty merry, only my fear upon me for what
I had newly done, do keep my content in. So, about five or six o’clock,
away, and I took my wife and the two Bateliers, and carried them
homeward, and W. Batelier ‘lighting, I carried the women round by
Islington, and so down Bishopsgate Street home, and there to talk and
sup, and then to bed.