18th (Lord’s day). Up, and all the morning till 2 o’clock at my
Office, with Gibson and Tom, about drawing up fair my discourse of the
Administration of the Navy, and then, Mr. Spong being come to dine with
me, I in to dinner, and then out to my Office again, to examine the fair
draught; and so borrowing Sir J. Minnes’s coach, he going with Colonel
Middleton, I to White Hall, where we all met and did sign it and then
to my Lord Arlington’s, where the King, and the Duke of York, and Prince
Rupert, as also Ormond and the two Secretaries, with my Lord Ashly
and Sir T. Clifton was. And there, by and by, being called in, Mr.
Williamson did read over our paper, which was in a letter to the Duke of
York, bound up in a book with the Duke of York’s Book of Instructions.
He read it well; and, after read, we were bid to withdraw, nothing being
at all said to it. And by and by we were called in again, and nothing
said to that business; but another begun, about the state of this year’s
action, and our wants of money, as I had stated the same lately to our
Treasurers; which I was bid, and did largely, and with great content,
open. And having so done, we all withdrew, and left them to debate our
supply of money; to which, being called in, and referred to attend on
the Lords of the Treasury, we all departed. And I only staid in the
House till the Council rose; and then to the Duke of York, who in the
Duchess’s chamber come to me, and told me that the book was there left
with my Lord Arlington, for any of the Lords to view that had a mind,
and to prepare and present to the King what they had to say in writing,
to any part of it, which is all we can desire, and so that rested. The
Duke of York then went to other talk; and by and by comes the Prince
of Tuscany to visit him, and the Duchess; and I find that he do still
remain incognito, and so intends to do all the time he stays here, for
avoiding trouble to the King and himself, and expence also to both.
Thence I to White Hall Gate, thinking to have found Sir J. Minnes’s
coach staying for me; but, not being there, and this being the first day
of rain we have had many a day, the streets being as dusty as in summer,
I forced to walk to my cozen Turner’s, and there find my wife newly gone
home, which vexed me, and so I, having kissed and taken leave of Betty,
who goes to Putney to school to-morrow, I walked through the rain to the
Temple, and there, with much ado, got a coach, and so home, and there to
supper, and Pelling comes to us, and after much talk, we parted, and to
bed.