3rd. Up, after a very good night’s rest, and was called upon by Sir H.
Cholmly, who was with me an hour, and though acquainted did not stay
to talk with my company I had in the house, but away, and then I to my
guests, and got them to breakfast, and then parted by coaches; and I
did, in mine, carry my she-cozen Pepys and her daughters home, and there
left them, and so to White Hall, where W. Hewer met me; and he and
I took a turn in St. James’s Park, and in the Mall did meet Sir W.
Coventry and Sir J. Duncomb, and did speak with them about some business
before the Lords of the Treasury; but I did find them more than usually
busy, though I knew not then the reason of it, though I guess it by what
followed to-morrow. Thence to Dancre’s, the painter’s, and there saw
my picture of Greenwich, finished to my very good content, though this
manner of distemper do make the figures not so pleasing as in oyle. So
to Unthanke’s, and there took up my wife, and carried her to the Duke of
York’s playhouse, and there saw an old play, the first time acted these
forty years, called “The Lady’s Tryall,” acted only by the young people
of the house; but the house very full. But it is but a sorry play, and
the worse by how much my head is out of humour by being a little sleepy
and my legs weary since last night. So after the play we to the New
Exchange, and so called at my cozen Turner’s; and there, meeting Mr.
Bellwood, did hear how my Lord Mayor, being invited this day to dinner
at the Reader’s at the Temple, and endeavouring to carry his sword up,
the students did pull it down, and forced him to go and stay all the day
in a private Councillor’s chamber, until the Reader himself could get
the young gentlemen to dinner; and then my Lord Mayor did retreat out of
the Temple by stealth, with his sword up. This do make great heat among
the students; and my Lord Mayor did send to the King, and also I hear
that Sir Richard Browne did cause the drums to beat for the Train-bands,
but all is over, only I hear that the students do resolve to try the
Charter of the City. So we home, and betimes to bed, and slept well all
night.