29th. Up, and with W. Hewer in Colonel Middleton’s coach to White Hall,
and there to the Duke of York, to attend him, where among other things I
did give a severe account of our proceedings, and what we found, in the
business of Sir W. Jenings’s demand of Supernumeraries. I thought it a
good occasion to make an example of him, for he is a proud, idle fellow;
and it did meet with the Duke of York’s acceptance and well-liking; and
he did call him in, after I had done, and did not only give him a soft
rebuke, but condemns him to pay both their victuals and wages, or right
himself of the purser. This I was glad of, and so were all the rest of
us, though I know I have made myself an immortal enemy by it. Thence
home by hackney, calling Roger Pepys at the Temple gate in the
bookseller’s shop, and to the Old Exchange, where I staid a little to
invite my uncle Wight, and so home, and there find my aunt Wight and her
husband come presently, and so to dinner; and after dinner Roger, and I,
and my wife, and aunt, to see Mr. Cole; but he nor his wife was within,
but we looked upon his picture of Cleopatra, which I went principally to
see, being so much commended by my wife and aunt; but I find it a base
copy of a good originall, that vexed me to hear so much commended.
Thence to see Creed’s wife, and did so, and staid a while, where both
of them within; and here I met Mr. Bland, newly come from Gales [Cadiz]
after his differences with Norwood. I think him a foolish, light-headed
man; but certainly he hath been abused in this matter by Colonel
Norwood. Here Creed shewed me a copy of some propositions, which Bland
and others, in the name of the Corporation of Tangier, did present to
Norwood, for his opinion in, in order to the King’s service, which were
drawn up very humbly, and were really good things; but his answer
to them was in the most shitten proud, carping, insolent, and
ironically-prophane stile, that ever I saw in my life, so as I shall
never think the place can do well, while he is there. Here, after some
talk, and Creed’s telling us that he is upon taking the next house to
his present lodgings, which is next to that that my cozen Tom Pepys once
lived in, in Newport Street, in Covent Garden; and is in a good place,
and then, I suppose, he will keep his coach. So, setting Roger down at
the Temple, who tells me that he is now concluded in all matters with
his widow, we home, and there hired my wife to make an end of Boyle’s
Book of Formes, to-night and to-morrow; and so fell to read and sup,
and then to bed. This day, Mr. Ned Pickering brought his lady to see my
wife, in acknowledgment of a little present of oranges and olives, which
I sent her, for his kindness to me in the buying of my horses, which was
very civil. She is old, but hath, I believe, been a pretty comely woman: