24th. Up, and walked abroad in the garden, and find that Mrs. Tooker has
not any of her daughters here as I expected and so walked to the yard,
leaving Middleton at the pay, and there I only walked up and down the
yard, and then to the Hill-House, and there did give order for the coach
to be made ready; and got Mr. Gibson, whom I carried with me, to go with
me and Mr. Coney, the surgeon, towards Maydston which I had a mighty
mind to see, and took occasion, in my way, at St. Margett’s, to pretend
to call to see Captain Allen to see whether Mrs. Jowles, his daughter,
was there; and there his wife come to the door, he being at London,
and through a window, I spied Jowles, but took no notice of he but made
excuse till night, and then promised to come and see Mrs. Allen again,
and so away, it being a mighty cold and windy, but clear day; and had
the pleasure of seeing the Medway running, winding up and down mightily,
and a very fine country; and I went a little out of the way to have
visited Sir John Bankes, but he at London; but here I had a sight of
his seat and house, the outside, which is an old abbey just like
Hinchingbroke, and as good at least, and mighty finely placed by the
river; and he keeps the grounds about it, and walls and the house,
very handsome: I was mightily pleased with the sight of it. Thence to
Maydstone, which I had a mighty mind to see, having never been there;
and walked all up and down the town, and up to the top of the steeple,
and had a noble view, and then down again: and in the town did see an
old man beating of flax, and did step into the barn and give him money,
and saw that piece of husbandry which I never saw, and it is very
pretty: in the street also I did buy and send to our inne, the Bell, a
dish of fresh fish. And so, having walked all round the town, and found
it very pretty, as most towns I ever saw, though not very big, and
people of good fashion in it, we to our inne to dinner, and had a good
dinner; and after dinner a barber come to me, and there trimmed me, that
I might be clean against night, to go to Mrs. Allen. And so, staying
till about four o’clock, we set out, I alone in the coach going and
coming; and in our way back, I ‘light out of the way to see a Saxon
monument,

     [Kits-Cotty House, a cromlech in Aylesford parish, Kent, on a
     hillside adjacent to the river Medway, three and a half miles N. by
     W. of Maidstone.  It consists of three upright stones and an
     overlying one, and forms a small chamber open in front.  It is
     supposed to have been the centre of a group of monuments indicating
     the burial-place of the Belgian settlers in this part of Britain.
     Other stones of a similar character exist in the neighbourhood.]

as they say, of a King, which is three stones standing upright, and a
great round one lying on them, of great bigness, although not so big
as those on Salisbury Plain; but certainly it is a thing of great
antiquity, and I mightily glad to see it; it is near to Aylesford,
where Sir John Bankes lives. So homeward, and stopped again at Captain
Allen’s, and there ‘light, and sent the coach and Gibson home, and I
and Coney staid; and there comes to us Mrs. Jowles, who is a very
fine, proper lady, as most I know, and well dressed. Here was also a
gentleman, one Major Manly, and his wife, neighbours; and here we staid,
and drank, and talked, and set Coney and him to play while Mrs. Jowles
and I to talk, and there had all our old stories up, and there I had
the liberty to salute her often, and pull off her glove, where her hand
mighty moist, and she mighty free in kindness to me, and je do not at
all doubt that I might have had that that I would have desired de elle
had I had time to have carried her to Cobham, as she, upon my proposing
it, was very willing to go, for elle is a whore, that is certain, but
a very brave and comely one. Here was a pretty cozen of hers come in to
supper also, of a great fortune, daughter-in-law to this Manly, mighty
pretty, but had now such a cold, she could not speak. Here mightily
pleased with Mrs. Jowles, and did get her to the street door, and there
to her su breasts, and baiser her without any force, and credo that I
might have had all else, but it was not time nor place. Here staid till
almost twelve at night, and then with a lanthorn from thence walked over
the fields, as dark as pitch, and mighty cold, and snow, to Chatham, and
Mr. Coney with great kindness to me: and there all in bed before I come
home, and so I presently to bed.