2nd. Up, and by water to White Hall, and there with the Office attended
the Duke of York, and staid in White Hall till about noon, and so
with W. Hewer to the Cocke, and there he and I dined alone with great
content, he reading to me, for my memory’s sake, my late collections of
the history of the Navy, that I might represent the same by and by to
the Duke of York; and so, after dinner, he and I to White Hall, and
there to the Duke of York’s lodgings, whither he, by and by, by his
appointment come: and alone with him an hour in his closet, telling him
mine and W. Coventry’s advice touching the present posture of the Navy,
as the Duke of Buckingham and the rest do now labour to make changes
therein; and that it were best for him to suffer the King to be
satisfied with the bringing in of a man or two which they desire. I did
also give the Duke of York a short account of the history of the Navy,
as to our Office, wherewith he was very well satisfied: but I do find
that he is pretty stiff against their bringing in of men against his
mind, as the Treasures were, and particularly against Child’s’ coming
in, because he is a merchant. After much discourse with him, we parted;
and [he to] the Council, while I staid waiting for his telling me when
I should be ready to give him a written account of the administration of
the Navy. This caused me to wait the whole afternoon, till night. In
the mean time, stepping to the Duchess of York’s side to speak with Lady
Peterborough; I did see the young Duchess,

          [The Princess Mary, afterwards Queen of England.]

a little child in hanging sleeves; dance most finely, so as almost
to ravish me, her ears were so good: taught by a Frenchman that
did heretofore teach the King, and all the King’s children, and the
Queen-Mother herself, who do still dance well. Thence to the council
door and Mr. Chevins took me into the back stairs, and they with his
friend, Mr. Fowkes, for whom he is very solicitous in some things
depending in this Office, he did make me, with some others that he
took in (among others, Alderman Back well), eat a pickled herring, the
largest I ever saw, and drink variety of wines till I was almost merry;
but I did keep in good tune; and so, after the Council was up, I home;
and there find my wife not yet come home from Deptford, he she hath been
all this day to see her mother, but she come and by, and so to talk,
and supper, and to bed. This night I did bring home from the King’s
potticary’s, in White Hall by Mr. Cooling’s direction, a water that he
says did him mighty good for his eyes. I pray God it may do me good;
but, by his description, his disease was the same as mine, and this do
encourage me to use it.