15th. Up, and with Tom to White Hall; and there at a Committee of
Tangier, where a great instance of what a man may lose by the neglect
of a friend: Povy never had such an opportunity of passing his accounts,
the Duke of York being there, and everybody well disposed, and in
expectation of them; but my Lord Ashly, on whom he relied, and for whose
sake this day was pitched on, that he might be sure to be there, among
the rest of his friends, staid too long, till the Duke of York and the
company thought unfit to stay longer and so the day lost, and God knows
when he will ever have so good a one again, as long as he lives;
and this was the man of the whole company that he hath made the most
interest to gain, and now most depended upon him. So up and down the
house a while, and then to the plaisterer’s, and there saw the figure of
my face taken from the mould: and it is most admirably like, and I will
have another made, before I take it away, and therefore I away and to
the Temple, and thence to my cozen Turner’s, where, having the last
night been told by her that she had drawn me for her Valentine, I did
this day call at the New Exchange, and bought her a pair of green silk
stockings and garters and shoe-strings, and two pair of jessimy gloves,
all coming to about 28s., and did give them her this noon. At the
‘Change, I did at my bookseller’s shop accidentally fall into talk with
Sir Samuel Tuke about trees, and Mr. Evelyn’s garden; and I do find him,
I think, a little conceited, but a man of very fine discourse as any
I ever heard almost, which I was mighty glad of. I dined at my cozen
Turner’s, and my wife also and her husband there, and after dinner, my
wife and I endeavoured to make a visit to Ned Pickering; but he not
at home, nor his lady; and therefore back again, and took up my cozen
Turner, and to my cozen Roger’s lodgings, and there find him pretty well
again, and his wife mighty kind and merry, and did make mighty much of
us, and I believe he is married to a very good woman. Here was also Bab.
and Betty, who have not their clothes yet, and therefore cannot go out,
otherwise I would have had them abroad to-morrow; but the poor girls
mighty kind to us, and we must skew them kindness also. Here in Suffolk
Street lives Moll Davis; and we did see her coach come for her to her
door, a mighty pretty fine coach. Here we staid an hour or two, and then
carried Turner home, and there staid and talked a while, and then my
wife and I to White Hall; and there, by means of Mr. Cooling, did get
into the play, the only one we have seen this winter: it was “The Five
Hours’ Adventure:” but I sat so far I could not hear well, nor was there
any pretty woman that I did see, but my wife, who sat in my Lady Fox’s
pew

     [We may suppose that pews were by no means common at this time
     within consecrated walls, from the word being applied indifferently
     by Pepys to a box in a place of amusement, and two days afterwards
     to a seat at church.  It would appear, from other authorities, that
     between 1646 and 1660 scarcely any pews had been erected; and Sir C.
     Wren is known to have objected to their introduction into his London
     churches.--B.]

with her. The house very full; and late before done, so that it was past
eleven before we got home. But we were well pleased with seeing it, and
so to supper, where it happened that there was no bread in the house,
which was an unusual case, and so to bed.