6th. Up, and to the office, where all the morning, only before the
Office I stepped to Sir W. Coventry at the Tower, and there had a great
deal of discourse with him; among others, of the King’s putting him out
of the Council yesterday, with which he is well contented, as with what
else they can strip him of, he telling me, and so hath long done, that
he is weary and surfeited of business; but he joins with me in his fears
that all will go to naught, as matters are now managed. He told me
the matter of the play that was intended for his abuse, wherein they
foolishly and sillily bring in two tables like that which he hath made,
with a round hole in the middle, in his closet, to turn himself in; and
he is to be in one of them as master, and Sir J. Duncomb in the other,
as his man or imitator: and their discourse in those tables, about the
disposing of their books and papers, very foolish. But that, that he
is offended with, is his being made so contemptible, as that any should
dare to make a gentleman a subject for the mirth of the world: and that
therefore he had told Tom Killigrew that he should tell his actors,
whoever they were, that did offer at any thing like representing him,
that he would not complain to my Lord Chamberlain, which was too weak,
nor get him beaten, as Sir Charles Sidly is said to do, but that he
would cause his nose to be cut. He told me the passage at the Council
much like what my Lord Bellassis told me. He told me how that the Duke
of Buckingham did himself, some time since, desire to join with him,
of all men in England, and did bid him propound to himself to be Chief
Minister of State, saying that he would bring it about, but that he
refused to have anything to do with any faction; and that the Duke of
Buckingham did, within these few days, say that, of all men in England,
he would have chosen W. Coventry to have joined entire with. He tells me
that he fears their prevailing against the Duke of York; and that their
violence will force them to it, as being already beyond his pardon. He
repeated to me many examples of challenging of Privy-Councillors and
others; but never any proceeded against with that severity which he is,
it never amounting to others to more than a little confinement. He tells
me of his being weary of the Treasury, and of the folly, ambition, and
desire of popularity of Sir Thomas Clifford; and yet the rudeness of his
tongue and passions when angry. This and much more discourse being
over I with great pleasure come home and to the office, where all the
morning, and at noon home to dinner, and thence to the office again,
where very hard at work all the afternoon till night, and then home to
my wife to read to me, and to bed, my cold having been now almost for
three days quite gone from me. This day my wife made it appear to me
that my late entertainment this week cost me above L12, an expence which
I am almost ashamed of, though it is but once in a great while, and is
the end for which, in the most part, we live, to have such a merry day
once or twice in a man’s life.