May 1st. Up betimes. Called up by my tailor, and there first put on
a summer suit this year; but it was not my fine one of flowered tabby
vest, and coloured camelott tunique, because it was too fine with the
gold lace at the hands, that I was afeard to be seen in it; but put on
the stuff suit I made the last year, which is now repaired; and so did
go to the Office in it, and sat all the morning, the day looking as
if it would be fowle. At noon home to dinner, and there find my wife
extraordinary fine, with her flowered tabby gown that she made two years
ago, now laced exceeding pretty; and, indeed, was fine all over; and
mighty earnest to go, though the day was very lowering; and she would
have me put on my fine suit, which I did. And so anon we went alone
through the town with our new liveries of serge, and the horses’ manes
and tails tied with red ribbons, and the standards there gilt with
varnish, and all clean, and green refines, that people did mightily look
upon us; and, the truth is, I did not see any coach more pretty, though
more gay, than ours, all the day. But we set out, out of humour--I
because Betty, whom I expected, was not come to go with us; and my wife
that I would sit on the same seat with her, which she likes not, being
so fine: and she then expected to meet Sheres, which we did in the Pell
Mell, and, against my will, I was forced to take him into the coach, but
was sullen all day almost, and little complaisant: the day also being
unpleasing, though the Park full of coaches, but dusty and windy, and
cold, and now and then a little dribbling rain; and, what made it
worst, there were so many hackney-coaches as spoiled the sight of the
gentlemen’s; and so we had little pleasure. But here was W. Batelier and
his sister in a borrowed coach by themselves, and I took them and we to
the lodge; and at the door did give them a syllabub, and other things,
cost me 12s., and pretty merry. And so back to the coaches, and there
till the evening, and then home, leaving Mr. Sheres at St. James’s Gate,
where he took leave of us for altogether, he; being this night to set
out for Portsmouth post, in his way to Tangier, which troubled my wife
mightily, who is mighty, though not, I think, too fond of him. But she
was out of humour all the evening, and I vexed at her for it, and she
did not rest almost all the night, so as in the night I was forced; to
take her and hug her to put her to rest. So home, and after a little
supper, to bed.