19th. With my coach to St. James’s; and there finding the Duke of York
gone to muster his men, in Hyde Park, I alone with my boy thither, and
there saw more, walking out of my coach as other gentlemen did, of a
soldier’s trade, than ever I did in my life: the men being mighty fine,
and their Commanders, particularly the Duke of Monmouth; but me-thought
their trade but very easy as to the mustering of their men, and the men
but indifferently ready to perform what was commanded, in the handling
of their arms. Here the news was first talked of Harry Killigrew’s being
wounded in nine places last night, by footmen, in the highway, going
from the Park in a hackney-coach towards Hammersmith, to his house at
Turnham Greene: they being supposed to be my Lady Shrewsbury’s men, she
being by, in her coach with six horses; upon an old grudge of his saying
openly that he had lain with her. Thence by and by to White Hall, and
there I waited upon the King and Queen all dinner-time, in the Queen’s
lodgings, she being in her white pinner and apron, like a woman with
child; and she seemed handsomer plain so, than dressed. And by and by,
dinner done, I out, and to walk in the Gallery, for the Duke of York’s
coming out; and there, meeting Mr. May, he took me down about four
o’clock to Mr. Chevins’s lodgings, and all alone did get me a dish of
cold chickens, and good wine; and I dined like a prince, being before
very hungry and empty. By and by the Duke of York comes, and readily
took me to his closet, and received my petition, and discoursed about my
eyes, and pitied me, and with much kindness did give me his consent to
be absent, and approved of my proposition to go into Holland to observe
things there, of the Navy; but would first ask the King’s leave, which
he anon did, and did tell me that the King would be a good master to
me, these were his words, about my eyes, and do like of my going into
Holland, but do advise that nobody should know of my going thither, but
pretend that I did go into the country somewhere, which I liked well.
Glad of this, I home, and thence took out my wife, and to Mr. Holliard’s
about a swelling in her cheek, but he not at home, and so round by
Islington and eat and drink, and so home, and after supper to bed. In
discourse this afternoon, the Duke of York did tell me that he was the
most amazed at one thing just now, that ever he was in his life, which
was, that the Duke of Buckingham did just now come into the Queen’s
bed-chamber, where the King was, and much mixed company, and among
others, Tom Killigrew, the father of Harry, who was last night
wounded so as to be in danger of death, and his man is quite dead; and
[Buckingham] there in discourse did say that he had spoke with some one
that was by (which all the world must know that it must be his whore, my
Lady Shrewsbury), who says that they did not mean to hurt, but beat him,
and that he did run first at them with his sword; so that he do hereby
clearly discover that he knows who did it, and is of conspiracy with
them, being of known conspiracy with her, which the Duke of York did
seem to be pleased with, and said it might, perhaps, cost him his life
in the House of Lords; and I find was mightily pleased with it, saying
it was the most impudent thing, as well as the most foolish, that ever
he knew man do in all his life.