21st (Lord’s day). Up, and by water over to Southwarke; and then, not
getting a boat, I forced to walk to Stangate; and so over to White Hall,
in a scull; where up to the Duke of York’s dressing-room, and there met
Harry Saville, and understand that Sir W. Coventry is come to his
house last night. I understand by Mr. Wren that his friends having, by
Secretary Trevor and my Lord Keeper, applied to the King upon his first
coming home, and a promise made that he should be discharged this day,
my Lord Arlington did anticipate them, by sending a warrant presently
for his discharge which looks a little like kindness, or a desire of it;
which God send! though I fear the contrary: however, my heart is glad
that he is out. Thence up and down the House. Met with Mr. May, who
tells me the story of his being put by Sir John Denham’s place, of
Surveyor of the King’s Works, who it seems, is lately dead, by the
unkindness of the Duke Buckingham, who hath brought in Dr. Wren: though,
he tells me, he hath been his servant for twenty years together in all
his wants and dangers, saving him from want of bread by his care and
management, and with a promise of having his help in his advancement,
and an engagement under his hand for L1000 not yet paid, and yet the
Duke of Buckingham so ungrateful as to put him by: which is an ill
thing, though Dr. Wren is a worthy man. But he tells me that the King is
kind to him, and hath promised him a pension of L300 a-year out of the
Works; which will be of more content to him than the place, which, under
their present wants of money, is a place that disobliges most people,
being not able to do what they desire to their lodgings. Here meeting
with Sir H. Cholmly and Povy, that tell me that my Lord Middleton is
resolved in the Cabal that he shall not go to Tangier; and that Sir
Edward Harlow [Harley], whom I know not, is propounded to go, who was
Governor of Dunkirke, and, they say, a most worthy brave man, which I
shall be very glad of. So by water (H. Russell coming for me) home to
dinner, where W. Howe comes to dine with me; and after dinner propounds
to me my lending him L500, to help him to purchase a place--the Master
of the Patent Office, of Sir Richard Piggott. I did give him a civil
answer, but shall think twice of it; and the more, because of the
changes we are like to have in the Navy, which will not make it fit for
me to divide the little I have left more than I have done, God knowing
what my condition is, I having not attended, and now not being able to
examine what my state is, of my accounts, and being in the world, which
troubles me mightily. He gone, I to the office to enter my journall for
a week. News is lately come of the Algerines taking L3000 in money,
out of one of our Company’s East India ships, outward bound, which will
certainly make the war last; which I am sorry for, being so poor as we
are, and broken in pieces. At night my wife to read to me, and then to
supper, where Pelling comes to see and sup with us, and I find that
he is assisting my wife in getting a licence to our young people to be
married this Lent, which is resolved shall be done upon Friday next, my
great day, or feast, for my being cut of the stone. So after supper to
bed, my eyes being very bad.