14th. Up, and to St. James’s to the Duke of York, and thence to White
Hall, where we met about office business, and then at noon with Mr. Wren
to Lambeth, to dinner with the Archbishop of Canterbury; the first time
I was ever there and I have long longed for it; where a noble house, and
well furnished with good pictures and furniture, and noble attendance
in good order, and great deal of company, though an ordinary day; and
exceeding great cheer, no where better, or so much, that ever I think
I saw, for an ordinary table: and the Bishop mighty kind to me,
particularly desiring my company another time, when less company there.
Most of the company gone, and I going, I heard by a gentleman of a
sermon that was to be there; and so I staid to hear it, thinking it
serious, till by and by the gentleman told me it was a mockery, by one
Cornet Bolton, a very gentleman-like man, that behind a chair did pray
and preach like a Presbyter Scot that ever I heard in my life, with all
the possible imitation in grimaces and voice. And his text about the
hanging up their harps upon the willows: and a serious good sermon too,
exclaiming against Bishops, and crying up of my good Lord Eglinton, a
till it made us all burst; but I did wonder to have the Bishop at this
time to make himself sport with things of this kind, but I perceive it
was shewn him as a rarity; and he took care to have the room-door shut,
but there were about twenty gentlemen there, and myself, infinitely
pleased with the novelty. So over to White Hall, to a little Committee
of Tangier; and thence walking in the Gallery, I met Sir Thomas Osborne,
who, to my great content, did of his own accord fall into discourse with
me, with so much professions of value and respect, placing the whole
virtue of the Office of the Navy upon me, and that for the Comptroller’s
place, no man in England was fit for it but me, when Sir J. Minnes, as
he says it is necessary, is removed: but then he knows not what to do
for a man in my place; and in discourse, though I have no mind to the
other, I did bring in Tom Hater to be the fittest man in the world
for it, which he took good notice of. But in the whole I was mightily
pleased, reckoning myself now fifty per cent. securer in my place than
I did before think myself to be. Thence to Unthanke’s, and there find
my wife, but not dressed, which vexed me, because going to the Park,
it being a most pleasant day after yesterday’s rain, which lays all
the dust, and most people going out thither, which vexed me. So home,
sullen; but then my wife and I by water, with my brother, as high as
Fulham, talking and singing, and playing the rogue with the Western
barge-men, about the women of Woolwich, which mads them, an so back home
to supper and to bed.